================================================================================
   DAILY INTELLIGENCE DIGEST: 2026-06-21
================================================================================

Total High-Signal Articles Filtered: 44
Irrelevant Feed Items Dropped: 98
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

1. TITLE: Toward an O*NET for AI R&D
   SOURCE: Epoch_AI | DATE: Wed, 17 Jun 2026 21:32:42 GMT
   URL: https://epochai.substack.com/p/toward-an-onet-for-ai-r-and-d
   MATCHED PILLARS: [SILICON HARDWARE]
   EXTRACTED SNIPPET:
      CONTENT:
      This post is part of Epoch AI’s Gradient Updates newsletter, which shares
      more opinionated or informal takes on big questions in AI progress. These
      posts solely represent the views of the authors, and do not necessarily
      reflect the views of Epoch AI as a whole.What trends are we
      extrapolating?A common way that experts forecast AI timelines is so simple
      it’s hard to believe: trend extrapolation. Sure they also use numerical
      models that bake in things like runaway feedback loops, but the bread and
      butter of AI forecasting is to draw a line on a graph and extend it as far
      as you dare. Somehow this works well enough to be a state-of-the-art
      approach. However, the trends they extrapolate share a common weakness:
      they lean heavily on easy-to-measure things, not what we directly care
      about — how close AI is to doing AI research itself.Many experts want to
      know when we’ll fully automate AI research, because this would massively
      speed up AI progress, kicking off an “intelligence explosion”.1 If that’s
      right, it’s hugely important to know how close we are. But historically,
      there haven’t been many points of direct evidence to point to, because
      full automation of AI R&D has been so hard to measure. Instead,
      researchers have been forced to rely on proxies.One such proxy is in key
      AI inputs like compute, data, and energy. Take Situational Awareness,
      which extends “effective compute” five years into the future until AI
      research gets automated:But these inputs are only rough proxies for
      capabilities and you need to go on “vibes” to say how much compute you
      need to match the world’s top AI researchers.A second approach is to track
      the length of tasks that AIs can complete, where “length” is how long a
      skilled human takes. This is what METR did with their “time horizon”
      metric, which was then extrapolated in the famous AI 2027 scenario to
      forecast when AIs would become “superhuman coders”, before automating AI
      R&D.But the benchmarks used to construct METR’s time horizon miss out on
      many of the tasks and complexities of research. It’s one thing to be able
      to finetune a small GPT-2 model, and another to be able to coordinate five
      projects at the same time, dealing with a million lines of code, without a
      clear criterion for success or failure.So it would be nice to know
      everything that AI R&D actually consists of. Otherwise we’ll always be at
      risk of streetlighting (extrapolating whatever happens to be easiest to
      measure). We can better avoid this if we have a list of the tasks involved
      in AI R&D, to track what we’re aware of and what we’re not
      investigating.Armed with such a list, we could better interpret the
      extrapolations we already have: when a benchmark score climbs, a task list
      tells us which parts of the job that improvement covers, and which parts
      it doesn’t touch. And we could build new trends to extrapolate, like the
      fraction of tasks that are automated, or how much uplift researchers get
      on each one.In this post, we present a first version of su... [TRUNCATED]

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

2. TITLE: GaN Power Devices Go Vertical
   SOURCE: Semiconductor_Engineering | DATE: Thu, 18 Jun 2026 07:01:12 +0000
   URL: https://semiengineering.com/gan-power-devices-go-vertical/
   MATCHED PILLARS: [SUPPLY CHAIN CHOKEPOINTS]
   EXTRACTED SNIPPET:
      CONTENT:
      Key Takeaways:
      On paper, GaN is an excellent candidate for high-voltage power
      applications. That potential has been difficult to realize due to the lack
      of sufficiently high-quality starting material.
      In particular, high-voltage applications require vertical designs. Recent
      advances in GaN growth are making these designs more feasible.
      Promising designs and complete process flows have been demonstrated. They
      are not yet mature enough to challenge silicon and particularly SiC in
      real-world high-voltage applications.
      Gallium nitride power devices have made significant inroads into low-
      voltage applications like chargers for consumer electronics. High-voltage
      applications like power generation and transportation have more demanding
      requirements and have, so far, been more skeptical of GaN’s potential.
      Requirements for power devices can be summarized by Baliga’s figure of
      merit [⁠1]:
      where ε is the dielectric constant, μe is the electron mobility, and Ec is
      the critical field. The drift layer resistance is then given by:
      where VB is the breakdown voltage. In a comprehensive review, Tetsu Kachi
      of Nagoya University noted that the critical electric field, Ec, in wide
      bandgap semiconductors like SiC and GaN is up to 10 times that of silicon.
      These materials offer superior breakdown characteristics with lower
      resistance. [⁠2]
      The performance difference between SiC and GaN, on the other hand, is less
      clear-cut. Silicon carbide offers superior thermal conductivity (4.9
      W/cm-K versus 1.3 W/cm-K for GaN), while GaN has better carrier mobility
      (2,000 cm2/V-sec versus 900 cm2/V-sec for SiC), thereby giving designers
      more flexibility. [⁠3]
      However, the potential advantages of GaN have been slow to materialize
      because the material is so hard to manufacture. While silicon and silicon
      carbide are both available as large, freestanding wafers, GaN is typically
      grown on silicon substrates. A thick transition layer accommodates the
      lattice and thermal expansion mismatch between GaN and silicon. As a
      result, GaN-on-silicon substrates incorporate a lot of stress, making them
      fragile and prone to breakage, according to imec’s Karen Geens. [⁠4]
      Optical GaN devices have developed more quickly than power devices, in
      part because optical devices are smaller. Power devices need a larger area
      of high-quality, dislocation-free material.
      Most commercial GaN power devices depend on lateral conduction. A two-
      dimensional electron gas (2DEG) at the interface between GaN and AlGaN
      allows current to move freely within it, but not in or out of the plane.
      Unfortunately, breakdown voltage depends on the gate-to-drain distance.
      High-voltage devices with lateral current flow need larger footprints. The
      thin 2DEG layer also poses reliability risks due to surface and interface
      traps.
      Silicon and SiC devices use vertical designs to increase the gate-drain
      distance as needed. Building vertical devices in GaN is difficult because
      designers need either GaN-on-GaN substrates or the a... [TRUNCATED]

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

3. TITLE: VLSI 2026: Intel 18A Platform Momentum From Devices To Routed Designs
   SOURCE: Semiconductor_Engineering | DATE: Thu, 18 Jun 2026 07:04:58 +0000
   URL: https://semiengineering.com/vlsi-2026-intel-18a-platform-momentum-from-devices-to-routed-designs/
   MATCHED PILLARS: [SILICON HARDWARE, SUPPLY CHAIN CHOKEPOINTS, PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE]
   EXTRACTED SNIPPET:
      CONTENT:
      Intel Foundry’s process technology roadmap is powered by innovations that
      are enabling customers to build increasingly capable products for the
      artificial intelligence (AI) era. At the 2026 IEEE/JSAP Symposium on VLSI
      Technology & Circuits, Intel Foundry presented progress on a number of
      important aspects of our front-end silicon process innovations. This
      includes Intel 18A-P featuring Power Boost, our first performance
      enhancement to the Intel 18A node family, now in risk production. We also
      share research on the advantages of backside power, supported by data from
      designers on the product side of Intel on how building products on a
      backside power/gate-all-around (GAA) process provides multiple advantages.
      Among the six research papers presented at the event, we demonstrated our
      continued advancement of gallium nitride (GaN) technology by sharing new
      developments in efficient power management of scalable digital logic on a
      300 mm GaN and silicon platform. In addition, we presented a scaled
      complementary FET (CFET) process with features to balance performance
      benefit and process risk as well as subtractive ruthenium (sRu)
      interconnects with airgap, enabling a more efficient metallization scheme
      for tight pitches. Intel Foundry’s continued investment in R&D underscores
      our commitment to our customers, delivering silicon-validated innovations
      that enable future-ready performance and efficiency gains.
      CPU Learnings with GAA Transistors and Backside Power
      Today, the industry’s biggest power delivery challenges are structural.
      Frontside power delivery networks no longer scale to support increasingly
      demanding workloads, leading to vanishing voltage margins and tighter
      thermal and reliability constraints. Backside-powered GAA nodes offer a
      scaling solution for next generation CPUs, AI accelerators, and system of
      chips (SoCs).
      Research by Intel engineers on CPU cores using GAA with backside power
      found that lower IR drop across the power delivery network allows more
      transistor performance to translate into real core frequency and closer-
      to-ideal silicon scaling. At low operating voltages around 0.5 V, GAA
      designs with backside power demonstrated approximately 30% higher
      frequency versus FinFET.¹ This enables new low-voltage operating points
      that were previously impractical for mobile, AI edge, and energy-efficient
      compute. These gains are especially relevant for power-constrained
      workloads, where reducing voltage delivers more power savings with longer
      battery life, and lower cooling and packaging costs.
      Figure 1. Core frequency improves by approximately 30% at 0.5 V for GAA
      backside power design.
      Backside Power Delivery Impact on Routed Designs
      At VLSI 2026, Intel Foundry engineers shared improvements in backside
      power delivery on advanced nodes. Backside power delivery shifts major
      power routing to the rear of the wafer, reducing congestion by freeing
      frontside interconnect for signals. Routed blocks showed approximately 11%
      area reduction... [TRUNCATED]

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

4. TITLE: Another Giant Leap: The Rubin CPX Specialized Accelerator & Rack
   SOURCE: SemiAnalysis | DATE: Wed, 10 Sep 2025 19:57:18 +0000
   URL: https://semianalysis.com/2025/09/10/another-giant-leap-the-rubin-cpx-specialized-accelerator-rack/
   MATCHED PILLARS: [SILICON HARDWARE, SUPPLY CHAIN CHOKEPOINTS, PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE]
   EXTRACTED SNIPPET:
      CONTENT:
      Nvidia announced the Rubin CPX, a solution that is specifically designed
      to be optimized for the prefill phase, with the single-die Rubin CPX
      heavily emphasizing compute FLOPS over memory bandwidth. This is a game
      changer for inference, and its significance is surpassed only by the March
      2024 announcement of the GB200 NVL72 Oberon rack-scale form factor. Only
      with hardware specialized to the very different phases of inference,
      prefill and decode, can disaggregated serving achieve its full potential.
      As a result, the rack system design gap between Nvidia and its competitors
      has become canyon-sized. AMD and custom silicon competitors may have made
      a small step forward in emulating Nvidia’s 72-GPU rack scale design, but
      Nvidia has just made another Giant Leap, again leaving competitors very
      distant objects in the rear-view mirror.
      AMD and ASIC providers have already been investing heavily to catch up in
      terms of their own rack-scale solutions. AMD in particular has been
      working tirelessly to improve their software stack to try to close the gap
      with Nvidia, but now everyone will needs to redouble their investments yet
      again as they will have to develop their own prefill chips, delaying
      further the timeframe with which they can close this gap. With this
      announcement, all of Nvidia’s competitors will be sent back to the drawing
      board to reconfigure their entire roadmaps again in a repeat of how Oberon
      changed roadmaps across the industry.
      The Rubin CPX
      Because the prefill stage during inference tends to heavily utilize
      compute (FLOPS) and only lightly use memory bandwidth, running prefill on
      a chip with lots of expensive HBM featuring very high memory bandwidth is
      a waste. The answer is a chip that is skinny on memory bandwidth and
      relatively fat on compute. Enter the Rubin CPX GPU.
      Source: Nvidia
      The Rubin CPX features 20 PFLOPS of FP4 dense compute but only 2TB/s of
      memory bandwidth. It also features 128GB of GDDR7 memory, a lower quantity
      of less expensive memory when compared to the VR200. By comparison, the
      dual-die R200 chip offers 33.3 PFLOPS of FP4 dense and 288GB of HBM
      offering 20.5 TB/s of memory bandwidth.
      Source: SemiAnalysis, Nvidia
      The introduction of the Rubin CPX expands the VR200 family of rack scale
      servers into three flavors:
      VR200 NVL144: 72 GPUs packages across 18 compute trays, with 4 R200 GPU
      packages in each compute tray.
      VR200 NVL144 CPX: 72 Logical GPUs packages in addition to 144 Rubin CPX
      GPU packages across 18 compute trays, with 4 R200 GPU packages and 8 Rubin
      CPX GPU  packages in each compute tray.
      Vera Rubin CPX Dual Rack: Two discrete racks – one VR200 NVL144 rack plus
      one VR CPX rack with 144 Rubin CPX GPUs across 18 compute trays, with 8
      Rubin CPX GPUs in each compute tray.
      Source: SemiAnalysis, Nvidia
      In this report, we will first explain the story so far and the impetus for
      the development of the Rubin CPX because of the different role memory
      plays during prefill an... [TRUNCATED]

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

5. TITLE: The economics of superstar AI researchers
   SOURCE: Epoch_AI | DATE: Wed, 13 May 2026 22:24:26 GMT
   URL: https://epochai.substack.com/p/the-economics-of-superstar-ai-researchers
   MATCHED PILLARS: [SILICON HARDWARE]
   EXTRACTED SNIPPET:
      CONTENT:
      Gradient Updates shares more opinionated or informal takes on big
      questions in AI progress. These posts solely represent the views of the
      authors, and do not necessarily reflect the views of Epoch AI as a
      whole.AI is one of those fields where the best winds up much better off
      than the rest. Superstar researchers at frontier labs earn over ten times
      more than most of their colleagues, who earn measly million-dollar
      salaries. They might even earn over a hundred times more than your average
      AI postdoc:Ballpark estimates of AI researcher compensation. Postdoc
      compensation is estimated using NSF report data. For tenure-track
      professors, I anchor on this Taulbee 2024 survey of computer scientists.
      Compensation for frontier lab researchers is estimated from Levels.fyi for
      L4-L5 OpenAI researchers, and news reports for superstars.So why are the
      differences in pay so large? The naive explanation is that some
      researchers are just vastly superior. Perhaps the superstar researchers
      have excellent research taste in designing algorithms and experiments. Or
      they have a knack for pulling off “yolo runs” — training runs that
      implement many ambitious changes all at once, relying on deep intuition,
      whereas most people would need to systematically test the individual
      changes to make sure they work. Under this framing, superstars are the
      “10× researchers” that Silicon Valley so deeply reveres, and it’s their
      quality that makes the difference in pay.1The problem with this
      explanation is that it’s very incomplete. In reality, we should expect to
      see big differences in pay even if superstars were only a tiny bit better
      than your average postdoc. But why?The superstar effectThe short answer is
      this: there’s a well-known economic dynamic which turns small differences
      in ability into big differences in pay. Here are two illustrative
      examples:In the 100-meter sprint, the gold-medallist gets much more reward
      and attention than the silver-medallist, despite them being quite
      literally neck-and-neck for most of the race. Consider the London 2012
      Olympics, where Usain Bolt won gold. Most people have no idea who won
      silver, despite finishing just 0.12 seconds behind — do you?Some musicians
      earn much more than others. Consider Taylor Swift: last year, she earned
      $60-70 million from Spotify. I don’t doubt that she’s a “10× singer”
      compared to me. But it’s very debatable whether she’s that much better
      than other extremely popular singers like Ed Sheeran, Blackpink, Charli
      XCX, and Lana Del Rey, who instead earned closer to $5-25 million.Ballpark
      estimates of 2025 Spotify earnings of several extremely famous artists.
      These were estimated by multiplying daily Spotify streams by 365 days, and
      earnings of $0.004 per stream.Across these two cases, small differences in
      ability led to big differences in pay some way or another. Economist
      Sherwin Rosen called this the “superstar effect,” and it kicks in when two
      conditions hold.One person’s work can reach a big market. Usually this...
      [TRUNCATED]

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

6. TITLE: The Epoch Brief - June 12, 2026
   SOURCE: Epoch_AI | DATE: Fri, 12 Jun 2026 21:01:42 GMT
   URL: https://epochai.substack.com/p/the-epoch-brief-june-12-2026
   MATCHED PILLARS: [PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE]
   EXTRACTED SNIPPET:
      CONTENT:
      This week at Epoch:The launch of our new Cyber Vulnerabilities explorer, a
      tool for better understanding how AI capabilities are changing
      cybersecurity.Two new Data Insights: the record for compute at a single
      data center has doubled every seven months, and AI infrastructure’s rising
      contribution to US GDP.Version 2 of FrontierMath: Tiers 1–4 is now
      available, and it shows a significant increase in AI math capabilities.
      Anthropic’s Fable 5 currently tops the leaderboards.Two new Gradient
      Updates: examining whether Mythos’ cyber capabilities live up to the hype,
      and proposing a framework for thinking about wealth distribution after
      AGI.Subscribe nowResearchIntroducing the Cyber Vulnerabilities explorerAs
      AI capabilities change what's possible for both cyber attackers and
      defenders, the Cyber Vulnerabilities explorer helps quantify that impact.
      The explorer tracks vulnerabilities reported to the CVE Program by all
      participating organizations since 2022. You can explore the full dataset,
      or filter for the 21 most notable vendors and open-source projects (e.g.,
      Microsoft, Google, Apple, and Linux). Reports can be broken down by
      severity level and overlaid with key AI milestones. That overlay reveals a
      dramatic uptick in High and Critical CVEs around the time Anthropic
      released Mythos Preview to Project Glasswing partners in late March. (For
      more on Mythos’ cybersecurity impact, see the Gradient Update from this
      week.)Data InsightsThe record for computing capacity in a single data
      center has doubled every 7 monthsSince the launch of SpaceXAI’s Colossus 1
      in August 2024, the record for the largest AI data center by computing
      capacity has doubled every seven months. Facilities like Anthropic-Amazon
      New Carlisle, Microsoft Fairwater Atlanta, and Meta Prometheus have each
      claimed the top spot at different times. Increased single-site capacity
      facilitates the training of more capable AI models.The AI boom has doubled
      computing infrastructure’s share of US GDPThe AI infrastructure boom,
      which began in 2023, has more than doubled the share of US GDP
      attributable to computing infrastructure. Investment in AI-related data
      center construction, compute hardware, and networking equipment accounted
      for ~0.8% of US GDP in Q1 2026, driving computing infrastructure as a
      whole to ~1.5% of GDP, up from a 2015–2022 average of ~0.7%. AI
      infrastructure is now the leading driver of growth in private investment
      in the US.The new FrontierMath: Tiers 1–4We launched Version 2 of
      FrontierMath: Tiers 1–4 today, following an audit that addressed small but
      critical errors in 42% of problems in the original benchmark. Model
      rankings on v2 are similar, but scores are higher across the board. Claude
      Fable 5, Anthropic's newest and most capable model, now holds the top
      spot, reaching 87% on Tiers 1–3 and 88% on Tier 4. This continues a streak
      of rapid improvement in Anthropic models’ math capabilities. (Note that
      Fable 5 is the publicly available version of the Mythos model,...
      [TRUNCATED]

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

7. TITLE: How To Build Billions of Bumps
   SOURCE: Semiconductor_Engineering | DATE: Thu, 18 Jun 2026 07:05:20 +0000
   URL: https://semiengineering.com/how-to-build-billions-of-bumps/
   MATCHED PILLARS: [SILICON HARDWARE, SUPPLY CHAIN CHOKEPOINTS]
   EXTRACTED SNIPPET:
      CONTENT:
      Key Takeaways:
      Hybrid bonding can result in a package containing billions (and eventually
      trillions) of connections.
      Building that many connections successfully requires extreme process
      uniformity across a wafer.
      Inspection isn’t practical, and test benefits from internal test
      mechanisms.
      Hybrid bonding allows unprecedented signal pitch, but fully populating
      dies and interposers with just 1µm between connections can enable billions
      of connections per chip. With that many, it’s no longer possible to
      inspect or test each connection individually.
      Managing yield for such a process requires process uniformity and
      predictability, as well as architectures that provide modularity,
      testability, and redundancy.
      “Hybrid bonding enables unprecedented interconnect density,” said Lakshmi
      Jain, director of product marketing for I/O library IP at Synopsys. “A
      full-size interposer tiled with chiplets and bonded at 1µm pitch can
      easily result in billions of internal connections. At this scale,
      manufacturing success is no longer about managing individual
      interconnects. It depends on architectural control that assumes some level
      of imperfection and is designed to tolerate it.”
      Hybrid bonding joins 10µm- to 1µm-pitch bumpless interconnects. The 1µm
      pitch is extremely aggressive by today’s standards, but even that doesn’t
      reflect a physical limit. Thomas Pleschke, business development manager at
      EV Group, sees even tighter pitch coming. “Theoretically, we could bond
      two 300mm wafers with 200nm pad pitch with several trillions of
      connections,” he said.
      Planar silicon processing has the benefit of building many connections in
      parallel, so whether it’s a million or a billion doesn’t really matter.
      What does matter is the uniformity of the process. Variations across a
      wafer could have a devastating impact. Meanwhile, adding infrastructure to
      the I/Os allows testing before and after bonding to ensure a reliable
      connection.
      It’s surprisingly easy to get to a billion
      The key to getting billions of connections is the 1µm pitch that hybrid
      bonding enables. Each millimeter can then host 1,000 “bumps.” (Calling
      them bumps is convenient, but the whole point of hybrid bonding is that
      you lose bumps and bond pad to pad.)
      An example package illustrates how this happens. For the purposes of this
      exercise, we’ll assume that interposers can be hybrid bonded to substrates
      (and it doesn’t change the conclusion if we don’t).
      Fig. 1: Processor package for counting bumps. If the HBM4 stacks are 16
      high, bump count can exceed 26 billion. (Source: Bryon Moyer/Semiconductor
      Engineering)
      We look to existing dies, where possible, just to give a die size. It
      doesn’t reflect the number of connections actually available on that die,
      but we’ll use the dimensions to figure out how many connections are
      possible with hybrid bonding for that size die.
      The package shown contains eight Intel Nova Lake processor dies, each
      measuring 14.8 × 6.6 mm2, which amounts to more than 97 million connect...
      [TRUNCATED]

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

8. TITLE: Lessons from History: The Great Railroad Buildout
   SOURCE: Fabricated_Knowledge | DATE: Wed, 17 Dec 2025 17:09:33 GMT
   URL: https://www.fabricatedknowledge.com/p/lessons-from-history-the-great-railroad
   MATCHED PILLARS: [MACRO FINANCE]
   EXTRACTED SNIPPET:
      CONTENT:
      It’s time for another history lesson—this one reaches further back than my
      usual fare. I spent months in books and unusual places on the internet for
      this piece, and I think I find the parallels to today’s AI buildout
      remarkable. This is the story of the railroad capital cycle: how America
      financed, built, overbought, and eventually consolidated the most
      transformative infrastructure of the 19th century. Early American History
      of Railroads: The Civil War and Land GrantsWhere does a cycle begin? For
      American railroads, the Civil War is a good starting point: the conflict
      demonstrated the value of railroads and was the first major use case for
      the transformative technology. Better, cheaper, and faster logistics could
      win wars, and railroads were partially why the North won. Source:
      https://www.reddit.com/r/MapPorn/comments/1dmygs2/1861_rail_network_prior_to_the_american_civil_war/The
      war was fought over railroads. For example, “Every major Civil War battle
      east of the Mississippi River took place within twenty miles of a rail
      line,” and one of the few critical advantages the North had over the South
      was a dominant standard railroad gauge and a higher quality network.
      Notice the redundancy of the northern roads compared to the south. And
      while many factors contributed to the Union victory, this was clearly one
      of them. The war demonstrated the value of the railroads, but in
      peacetime, the railroad industry itself roared to life. At the end of the
      Civil War (1865), it became clear that technology would shape the American
      West, and railroad construction increased from ~1000 miles per year to
      7000 miles per year within a few years. But before we go into the dramatic
      rise (and fall, and rise, and fall) of railroads, I need to discuss one of
      the core mechanisms that helped finance them in the early days: land
      grants. Land Grants and RailroadsThe mother of most railroads was land
      grants. Land grants enabled the financing and construction of the first
      railroads. The Pacific Railroad Act of 1862, passed during the Civil War,
      aimed to bind California to the Union before it could contemplate
      secession and was the first transcontinental railroad endeavor.
      Transcontinental railroads were ruinously expensive to build, with costs
      ranging from $45,000 to $60,000 per mile. In today’s dollars, that’s
      roughly $2.5 million per mile; for context, the first transcontinental
      cost about $1.2 billion total. The federal government was cash-strapped,
      but it had abundant land.So a clever solution was created: grant land in a
      10 to 40 mile corridor around a new railroad to the company itself, and
      parcel the land 50/50 between the railroad and the government. This would
      increase the land’s value, as it was in a remote location. The odd
      sections of the land parcels were conveyed to the railroads, which would
      then issue securities secured by the land.On paper, this was elegant.
      Public land was sold for $1.25 per acre. Grant half to a railroad, and the
      resulting settlemen... [TRUNCATED]

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

9. TITLE: Diversion and resale: estimating compute smuggling to China
   SOURCE: Epoch_AI | DATE: Fri, 01 May 2026 01:14:02 GMT
   URL: https://epochai.substack.com/p/diversion-and-resale-estimating-compute
   MATCHED PILLARS: [PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE]
   EXTRACTED SNIPPET:
      CONTENT:
      The following is excerpted from our full report, which contains
      interactive charts, a breakdown of our methodology and evidence, and a
      comparison to other estimates.Key takeawaysSubstantial quantities of AI
      chips have been sent to China in violation of US export controls. Evidence
      of diverted or missing chips, drawn from indictments and investigative
      reporting, points to nearly 300,000 Nvidia H100-equivalents by the end of
      2025. This would equal roughly a quarter of the compute China acquired
      through legal channels or domestic production. Because much smuggling goes
      undetected, the true total is likely higher.We estimate, with 90%
      confidence, that between 290,000 and 1.6 million H100-equivalents of
      compute were smuggled through the end of 2025. Our median estimate of
      660,000 represents roughly 3% of the global compute stockpile, comparable
      to what xAI, a leading US AI lab, had at the time. The upper bound of our
      estimate would mean that, by the end of 2025, the majority of China’s AI
      compute had been smuggled.We are uncertain about many variables, notably
      the magnitude of undetected smuggling and the proportion of chips
      allegedly diverted or missing that ultimately reached China.Subscribe
      nowOverviewOver the past several years, the United States has applied
      multiple rounds of compute-related export controls to China. The earliest
      rounds of export controls applied to semiconductor manufacturing equipment
      or to specific entities (e.g., Huawei’s addition to the BIS entity list in
      2019). In October 2022, the Commerce Department instituted export controls
      on all advanced chips with certain characteristics. Commerce tightened
      these export controls and expanded their scope in October 2023, increasing
      the incentives for smuggling chips to China. A late 2023 Center for New
      American Security (CNAS) analysis suggested that the volume of smuggled
      chips at the time was relatively low, but expected that there would be
      larger-scale smuggling efforts in the future.This prediction appears to
      have been borne out. Investigative reporting by the New York Times, Wall
      Street Journal, and The Information in 2024 found widespread evidence of
      banned chips being smuggled into China. In April 2025, Commerce imposed an
      additional licensing requirement on H20 chips, a type of chip popular in
      China that Nvidia had developed to comply with prior export controls.1
      This further restricted exports and incentivized smuggling. The Financial
      Times reported that over $1 billion in AI chips were smuggled between
      April and July.2Evidence of large-scale diversion by cloud companies has
      also accumulated. The DOJ indicted several Supermicro employees and
      arrested a company executive. The employees were accused of diverting $2.5
      billion in Nvidia chips to a pass-through entity, which was redirecting
      those servers to China. Bloomberg investigative reporting insinuates that
      Megaspeed, a Singaporean cloud provider, has tens of thousands of fewer
      chips in its Malaysian data centers th... [TRUNCATED]

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

10. TITLE: Scaling the Memory Wall: The Rise and Roadmap of HBM
   SOURCE: SemiAnalysis | DATE: Tue, 12 Aug 2025 01:16:06 +0000
   URL: https://semianalysis.com/2025/08/12/scaling-the-memory-wall-the-rise-and-roadmap-of-hbm/
   MATCHED PILLARS: [MACRO FINANCE, SILICON HARDWARE, SUPPLY CHAIN CHOKEPOINTS, PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE]
   EXTRACTED SNIPPET:
      CONTENT:
      The first portion of this report will explain HBM, the manufacturing
      process, dynamics between vendors, KVCache offload, disaggregated prefill
      decode, and wide / high-rank EP. The rest of the report will dive deeply
      into the future of HBM. We will cover the revolutionary change coming to
      HBM4 with custom base dies for HBM, what various different accelerators
      are doing with custom HBM including OpenAI, Nvidia, and AMD, the shoreline
      area problem, memory controller offload, repeater PHYs, LPDDR + HBM
      combos, and various beachfront expansion techniques. We will also discuss
      SRAM tags, compute under memory, supply chain implications, and Samsung.
      A Brief Overview of HBM
      As AI models grow in complexity, AI systems require memory with higher
      capacity, lower latency, higher bandwidth, and improved energy efficiency.
      Different forms of memory have different tradeoffs. SRAM is extremely fast
      but low density. DDR DRAM is high density and cheap but lacks bandwidth.
      The most popular memory today is on-chip HBM which strikes the balance
      between capacity and bandwidth.
      Source: Rambus
      HBM combines vertically stacked DRAM chips with ultra-wide data paths and
      has the optimal balance of bandwidth, density, and energy consumption for
      AI workloads. HBM is much more expensive to produce and has a warranted
      price premium to DDR5, but demand remains strong for HBM. All leading AI
      accelerators deployed for GenAI training and inference use HBM. The common
      trend across accelerator roadmaps is to scale memory capacity and
      bandwidth per chip by adding more stacks, higher layer counts, with faster
      generations of HBM. Architectures that rely on other forms of memory offer
      sub-optimal performance, as we have demonstrated.
      In this report, we will examine HBM’s present state, what’s happening in
      the supply chain, and the groundbreaking changes happening in the future.
      We’ll examine HBM’s critical role in AI accelerator architecture, the
      impact HBM is having on the DRAM market, and why it is upending the way
      memory market analysis is being performed. For subscribers, we will also
      address the major questions on Samsung’s future viability as a supplier,
      as well as highlight one technological change that may reverse the trend
      of increasing HBM capacity.
      HBM Primer
      First, a brief primer on HBM – what makes it special and challenging to
      manufacture. While HBM is commonly associated with multiple DRAM dies
      stacked in a 3DIC assembly, the other key feature is HBM’s much wider data
      bus, improving bandwidth even with mediocre signaling speeds. This
      significantly wider bus results in HBM being far superior in terms of
      bandwidth per package than any other form of memory.
      Source: SemiAnalysis
      The implication of having much more I/O is increased routing density and
      complexity. Each I/O requires an individual wire/trace, with additional
      wiring required for power and control. For a HBM3E stack, there are over a
      1,000 wires between the adjacent XPU and the HBM... [TRUNCATED]

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

11. TITLE: Oracle and Animal Spirits
   SOURCE: Fabricated_Knowledge | DATE: Mon, 15 Sep 2025 20:16:51 GMT
   URL: https://www.fabricatedknowledge.com/p/oracle-and-animal-spirits
   MATCHED PILLARS: [MACRO FINANCE, SILICON HARDWARE]
   EXTRACTED SNIPPET:
      CONTENT:
      Oracle just posted the single most astonishing quarter I have seen since
      Nvidia’s blowout in May 2023. A reminder is that it was the quarter where
      Nvidia guided to 100% Y/Y growth and shocked markets after the ChatGPT
      moment. It has been almost a straight line to becoming the world’s most
      valuable company since then. Oracle’s guidance is staggering for a
      different reason: its sheer magnitude.This was the largest one-day move in
      any stock’s history by absolute value. Larry Ellison also became the
      wealthiest person alive in the span of a trading day. The opening line of
      Oracle’s guidance explains why:Q1 Remaining Performance Obligations
      reached $455 billion, up 359% in both USD and constant currency.Pause and
      digest that number. Denmark’s GDP is about $450 billion. It’s a number so
      big I first thought it was a typo. It is almost unbelievable for a company
      to disclose hundreds of billions in future revenue; it is even rarer to
      offer four-year guidance. But Oracle just did:We now expect Oracle Cloud
      Infrastructure will grow 77% to $18 billion this fiscal year and then
      increase to $32 billion, $73 billion, $114 billion and $144 billion over
      the following 4 years. Much of this revenue is already booked in our $455
      billion RPO number, and we are off to a fantastic start this year.For
      context, Microsoft’s Azure is forecast to generate approximately $75
      billion this year, while AWS is expected to generate around $126 billion,
      and Google Cloud is projected to generate about $56 billion. Oracle was
      not even considered a top-tier option until recently. If its trajectory
      holds, it could surpass Google and perhaps even Azure within a few years.
      Look what it did to our year-end estimates. The street consensus shifted
      from approximately $95 billion to approximately $118 billion after the
      guide. Source:BloombergThis is what disruption looks like. I have argued
      before that the hyperscalers’ old moats, balance sheets, and CPU-centric
      distribution were less impregnable than they appeared. SemiAnalysis’s
      ClusterMAX benchmarks confirmed this, and it is now a genuine contender
      from Oracle. Capital as a moat is not a lasting one. History suggests that
      incumbents rarely dominate tangential markets. A focused challenger
      emerges, captures share, and reshapes the landscape. AWS played that role
      a decade ago; Oracle may be playing a similar role now. Amazon’s in-house
      Trainium effort increasingly resembles an “Amazon Basics” strategy, viable
      but not leading, while Oracle doubles down on the largest GPU-first cloud
      in the world.  The driver of this sudden leap is clear: OpenAI. Microsoft
      has slowed its spending; Oracle has filled the gap, becoming OpenAI’s
      primary infrastructure partner. That single customer dominates Oracle’s
      RPO. And if Oracle leverages its entrenched database franchise, it could
      become enterprises’ default inference partner as well. In one fell swoop,
      they are now the addressable inference partner for the majority of
      enterprises globally. It is wo... [TRUNCATED]

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

12. TITLE: A New Fracture Engine For Curvilinear Masks And MULTIGON Mask Data
   SOURCE: Semiconductor_Engineering | DATE: Thu, 18 Jun 2026 07:03:23 +0000
   URL: https://semiengineering.com/a-new-fracture-engine-for-curvilinear-masks-and-multigon-mask-data/
   MATCHED PILLARS: [SILICON HARDWARE]
   EXTRACTED SNIPPET:
      CONTENT:
      Curvilinear masks are rapidly moving into high-volume production. This
      transition is driven by the need for better pattern fidelity, larger wafer
      process windows, and more effective use of inverse lithography technology
      (ILT) and curvilinear optical proximity correction (OPC). However,
      curvilinear masks also create a new challenge for mask data preparation
      (MDP): when curvilinear MULTIGON patterns are converted into piecewise
      linear representation (particularly in high fidelity applications) the
      data can grow significantly, increasing turnaround time and potentially
      degrading the original curve intent.
      This is why the industry is adopting native curve data formats such as
      MULTIGON, the curvilinear extension to the SEMI P49 OASIS specification.
      MULTIGON enables mask data to represent real curves, including Bézier and
      B-spline curves, directly rather than approximating them through thousands
      or millions of short line segments. For manufacturers preparing for high-
      volume curvilinear mask production, native curve handling is becoming
      essential to preserve accuracy while managing file size, runtime, and
      downstream mask-writer requirements.
      Curvilinear mask adoption is also enabled by the continued deployment of
      multi-beam mask writers, which can write complex curved shapes more
      efficiently than traditional variable-shaped beam (VSB) approaches. As a
      result, mask flows can now benefit from MDP solutions that maintain the
      benefits of curvilinear patterning across the full data path—from OPC or
      ILT output through fracture, mask rule checking, and final mask-writer
      preparation. Key benefits of curvilinear MULTIGON masks include:
      Better support for curvilinear wafer targets and advanced ILT-generated
      mask shapes
      Improved mask manufacturability through smoother, more realistic pattern
      representation
      Reduced risk of unnecessary data expansion caused by piecewise linear
      curved shapes
      Higher correction freedom with less restriction from traditional mask rule
      check (MRC) constraints
      Expanded process window and improved pattern fidelity for leading-edge
      manufacturing
      The fracture engine is a critical component of the mask data preparation
      flow. It converts complex post-OPC or post-ILT layout data into mask-
      writer-ready data while preserving the intended geometry as accurately and
      efficiently as possible. In traditional rectilinear flows, this process is
      well understood. In curvilinear flows, however, the challenge is
      fundamentally different: the fracture engine must process smooth curves,
      comply with mask-writer constraints, and avoid unnecessary data growth or
      loss of geometric fidelity.
      Simply digitizing curves into piecewise linear polygons is not an ideal
      solution. Piecewise linear polygonization introduces an approximation
      step, which can create edge placement error on silicon, increase vertex
      count, and make downstream verification and fracture operations more
      expensive. For curvature-sensitive operations, smaller digitization
      tolerances do not... [TRUNCATED]

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

13. TITLE: Will Eatherton: How Cisco Plans to Compete in the AI Datacenter
   SOURCE: Fabricated_Knowledge | DATE: Mon, 27 Oct 2025 14:57:33 GMT
   URL: https://www.fabricatedknowledge.com/p/will-eatherton-how-cisco-plans-to
   MATCHED PILLARS: [MACRO FINANCE, SILICON HARDWARE]
   EXTRACTED SNIPPET:
      CONTENT:
      This transcript is lightly edited for readability. This is not paid, just
      an educational conversation. For deeper analysis, refer to the
      SemiAnalysis Networking model, “The New Networks” or Multi-Datacenter
      Training for more in-depth analysis. Doug: Thank you, Will, for being
      here. We’re going to have a conversation with Will Eatherton of Cisco.
      I’ll dive into your background, talk about Cisco the historical networking
      giant, and then Cisco’s AI opportunity today. First, Will — tell me about
      yourself.Will Eatherton: Great, Doug. Thanks for having me on. I’ve
      enjoyed browsing the site and its articles, so I’m happy to be here. I run
      Cisco networking engineering, focused on hyperscale engagements,
      datacenters, and service providers, which overlap a lot. I’ve been in the
      networking industry for about 25 years and have been acquired into Cisco
      twice.The first was around 2000, when I was at a startup working on multi-
      terabit ASICs — the first big wave when everyone thought they’d need
      multi-chassis switches to move terabits around. That work went into
      Cisco’s carrier switch. I was at Cisco for ten years and later was a VP at
      Juniper. The second startup was acquired by Cisco in 2018. The last seven
      years around AI have been an exciting ride. Most recently, I’m proud of
      the NVIDIA engagement; I’ve been the point person on the negotiations and
      integration, which hasn’t always been easy between Cisco and NVIDIA.Doug:
      Yeah, especially considering they have Mellanox. Why work together? Cisco
      was the 800-pound gorilla in the 2000s, and over the last decade-plus
      merchant silicon and other providers entered the space while Cisco leaned
      on legacy assets. Now with hyperscalers and AI, Cisco’s opportunity is
      open again. How is Cisco entering the AI datacenter space?Will Eatherton:
      To touch on history, there were glory days in the 2000s and 2010s — the
      telco and enterprise build-outs were largely Cisco. I left in 2010. The
      early cloud era was rough for Cisco; we acknowledged some arrogance and we
      missed the early cloud phase. I returned in 2018, and over the last
      several years we’ve gone all-in on hyperscale engagements. That dovetails
      with work on SONiC, optics, and the Acacia acquisition — a corrective
      pivot for a large company. We may not be as visible as we want yet, but
      we’re positioned to have impact and we’re taking moves — like the NVIDIA
      partnership — to address a broader customer base.Doug: You have real
      revenue — a billion in AI revenue and guidance that order volume could
      double next year. Walk me through the prongs: hyperscaler work, NVIDIA,
      Cisco One. What are the opportunities today?Will Eatherton: We set a $1B
      target for FY25; Chuck announced we exceeded it, and we’re guiding higher.
      FY25 (ended in August) was driven largely by hyperscale AI infrastructure.
      We explicitly separated traditional data-center revenue from that
      number.The key components were GPU-to-GPU interconnects where our boxes
      were deployed. Fixed boxes are the primary focu... [TRUNCATED]

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

14. TITLE: xAI’s Colossus 2 – First Gigawatt Datacenter In The World, Unique RL Methodology, Capital Raise
   SOURCE: SemiAnalysis | DATE: Tue, 16 Sep 2025 17:38:01 +0000
   URL: https://semianalysis.com/2025/09/16/xais-colossus-2-first-gigawatt-datacenter/
   MATCHED PILLARS: [MACRO FINANCE, SILICON HARDWARE, PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE]
   EXTRACTED SNIPPET:
      CONTENT:
      Much has been written about xAI’s Colossus 1. The Memphis build belongs in
      the history books: the largest AI training cluster, erected from scratch
      in 122 days. With roughly 200,000 H100/H200s and ~30,000 GB200 NVL72, it
      remains, today, the largest fully operational, single-coherent cluster
      (setting apart Google, master of multi-datacenter-training).
      However, Colossus 1’s ~300 MW looks modest next to the Gigawatt-scale
      clusters under construction by OpenAI, Meta and Anthropic. Their
      hyperscaler partners are happy to leverage their balance sheet and win the
      market by throwing dollars at it.
      Was xAI’s prowess a one-time wonder? Today we will publicize some data
      from our industry leading datacenter model over the last year that is
      accessible to clients. This is the our same proprietary data that called
      the Oracle deals many months ahead of the announcement.
      Source: SemiAnalysis Datacenter Industry Model – note: there is a lag
      between Datacenter operational and GPUs operational – Google and exact
      figures available in model
      Short answer: no. xAI is still squarely in the frontier-AI race and is
      positioned to leapfrog most rivals again on compute. By our estimates, its
      total datacenter capacity for a single training cluster will surpass Meta
      Superintelligence and Anthropic by Q3 2025. The datacenter capacity will
      be ready for the GPUs to be moved in to create the largest single
      datacenter in the world, yet again. xAI has to raise the capital for those
      GPUs, but they have the allocations from Nvidia to have it fully training
      large scale models early next year.
      Elon came up with a new genius trick to beat rivals at time-to-market.
      Colossus 2 will be an even more impressive achievement than xAI’s first
      cluster. Let’s dig in.
      The first half of this report will dig into the Colossus 2 prowess. The
      second half will discuss Grok models, our mid-to-long term thoughts on
      xAI, and the unique RL method xAI is using that may lead them to leapfrog
      OpenAI, Anthropic, and Google. 
      SemiAnalysis Is Hiring
      We are seeking a highly motivated & skilled Member of Technical Staff to
      join our growing special projects engineering team. You will play a
      crucial role in developing industry leading gpu cloud benchmarks &
      evaluation framework.  Our gpu cloud evaluation frameworks is endorsed by
      many tier 1 & 2 frontier labs. You may be a good fit if you have the
      following experience:
      Demonstrated experience in ML frameworks such as PyTorch or JAX through
      professional experience, personal projects, or personal Substack blogs
      1-2 years using GPU or TPU clusters and/or running a multi-tenant GPU
      cluster
      Past experience working at a hyperscaler or a GPU cloud (preferred)
      Solid understanding of SLURM, Kubernetes, NCCL & GPU Cloud industry
      Strong research skills and the ability to synthesize information from
      various sources to draw insights
      Compensation is competitive & as part of the interview process, you’ll
      complete a paid codi... [TRUNCATED]

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

15. TITLE: Frontier labs don’t use most AI compute (yet)
   SOURCE: Epoch_AI | DATE: Thu, 21 May 2026 15:42:35 GMT
   URL: https://epochai.substack.com/p/frontier-labs-dont-use-most-ai-compute
   MATCHED PILLARS: [MACRO FINANCE, SILICON HARDWARE, PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE]
   EXTRACTED SNIPPET:
      CONTENT:
      Gradient Updates shares more opinionated or informal takes on big
      questions in AI progress. These posts solely represent the views of the
      authors, and do not necessarily reflect the views of Epoch AI as a whole.
      The estimates of frontier developer compute discussed below are more
      tentative than our standard data work.OpenAI kicked off the AI boom when
      it launched ChatGPT in 2022. Frontier LLMs soon accrued hundreds of
      millions of users and billions in revenue, sparking a massive investment
      boom in AI compute infrastructure, with Nvidia’s AI-related sales spiking
      more than fourfold in 2023. Global AI computing power has now grown to the
      equivalent of around 20 million Nvidia H100s, funded by hundreds of
      billions of dollars in annual capital expenditures.Yet while OpenAI
      launched the compute boom, they don’t dominate AI compute usage. I
      estimate that the compute OpenAI uses for research, training, and
      inference as of the end of 2025 made up around 10% to 15% of the world’s
      operational AI compute supply, and this share was even smaller a year ago.
      Even after adding the other most well-resourced frontier developers —
      Anthropic, xAI, and the AI labs within Google and Meta — the combined
      total is probably still under half of the world total.In other words,
      there is a lot of AI compute that top frontier labs are not using.
      Anthropic and OpenAI have seen rapid growth in revenue and funding,
      enabling them to grow their AI compute faster than the world overall, and
      this will continue in 2026.But the top labs may capture a much larger
      share of global compute within a few years. At that point, compute growth
      at top labs would be more directly tied to the pace of total compute
      production, which could slow down the rapid growth we’ve seen in both
      model capabilities and AI deployment/revenue. For scaling to continue, the
      overall compute buildout would need to accelerate. Given that AI capital
      expenditure (capex) is already approaching $1 trillion per year, such an
      acceleration in compute production would require dramatic economic
      changes.Most AI compute probably doesn’t go to frontier AIMore details for
      each company can be found in the Appendix, and the accompanying research
      document.I don’t have a great estimate of the compute used by each of the
      five most resource-rich frontier developers, but we know enough to
      estimate their share of world compute.1OpenAI helpfully disclosed the
      total electric power capacity of its data centers, which can be converted
      to ~1.7 million in H100-equivalent (H100e) compute. We also know a lot
      about xAI’s Colossus data centers. I’m less certain about Anthropic, which
      had significantly less compute than OpenAI at the end of 2025, though
      probably still over 1 million H100e. The situation at Google DeepMind and
      Meta Superintelligence Labs is also unclear, since the compute owned by
      their parent companies (roughly one-third of the world total) is split
      across frontier AI, cloud, and other internal uses.2 It’s not clear that
      t... [TRUNCATED]

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

16. TITLE: RIP Classic Reasoning Benchmarks. What’s Next?
   SOURCE: Epoch_AI | DATE: Tue, 05 May 2026 20:24:28 GMT
   URL: https://epochai.substack.com/p/rip-classic-reasoning-benchmarks
   MATCHED PILLARS: [SILICON HARDWARE]
   EXTRACTED SNIPPET:
      CONTENT:
      This post is part of Epoch AI’s Gradient Updates newsletter, which shares
      more opinionated or informal takes on big questions in AI progress. These
      posts solely represent the views of the authors, and do not necessarily
      reflect the views of Epoch AI as a whole.Originally posted on Epoch
      AI.There’s a familiar recipe for reasoning benchmarks: tasks are text-
      only, output is easy to grade, and expert humans can do the tasks in
      several hours. Unfortunately, this recipe is now obsolete. As an
      emblematic case, consider GPQA: a benchmark consisting of graduate-level
      science questions. It had remarkable staying power but by now it’s clearly
      saturated.The same is true for many classical reasoning benchmarks,
      whether in science, math, or coding. What’s next? I think the old recipe
      points to a new recipe. Just relax one of the elements: text only, easy to
      grade, short time horizon, and expert human superiority. I see each of
      these categories as extremely fruitful to pursue, and far from saturated.
      The tradeoff is just that it takes more time and money to create such
      benchmarks.ShareKeep the classic format, but make it multimodalIt’s hard
      to say precisely, but to my eyes AI visual and spatial reasoning lags
      behind text-only reasoning. Still growing rapidly, but from a lower base.
      At any rate, it still seems comparably easy to create meaningful
      multimodal reasoning benchmarks.To give one example, at a recent Epoch
      team offsite, we ordered a piece of IKEA furniture, laid all the pieces
      out, labeled them, and then gave AI systems the instruction manual and
      asked them to identify the step in the instructions in which each piece
      was first used. Top models scored around 40%.1Which step is the part
      labeled 6 first used in? AI systems can’t say.This is still “classic” in
      that it’s easy to grade and humans beat AI over relatively short time
      horizons. I also consider it to be plausibly testing a capability relevant
      to tasks of broader import. For multimodal tasks, at least, one person
      having fun over the course of a week can still make interesting
      benchmarks. Other examples of this: SpatialBench and IRGB. Arguably ARC-
      AGI and other videogame benchmarks fit this bill as well.Keep the classic
      format, but push the time horizonsThe first generation of “long context”
      benchmarks would fill a model’s context window with data, often at least
      partly synthetically generated, and ask the model to process that data,
      often without tools. This measured the model’s “native” ability to keep
      track of lots of threads at once. Some such benchmarks still show some
      headroom. But, on the one such benchmark for which Anthropic reported
      scores, Claude Mythos jumped to 80%,2 where prior scores had been less
      than 40%. Perhaps this specific kind of long-context benchmark is nearing
      the end of its utility.Even so, I suspect long, reasoning-oriented
      benchmarks still have room to run. One direction I’m particularly
      interested in is games. While many games have significant multimodal
      aspect... [TRUNCATED]

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

17. TITLE: The Epoch Brief - May 8, 2026
   SOURCE: Epoch_AI | DATE: Sat, 09 May 2026 01:39:23 GMT
   URL: https://epochai.substack.com/p/the-epoch-brief-may-8-2026
   MATCHED PILLARS: [MACRO FINANCE, SILICON HARDWARE, SUPPLY CHAIN CHOKEPOINTS, PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE]
   EXTRACTED SNIPPET:
      CONTENT:
      Welcome to this edition of the Epoch AI Brief! This week:In a new report,
      we estimate that between 290,000 and 1.6 million H100-equivalent chips
      were smuggled into China through 2025.We launched the AI Chip Components
      data explorer, which builds on our AI Chip Owners explorer to track
      bottlenecks in the AI chip supply chain since 2024.We published a new
      Gradient Update on the future of AI benchmarks, paired with an episode of
      the Epoch After Hours podcast on the same theme.We published a new Data
      Insight: Anthropic and OpenAI earn more revenue per employee than any
      major public tech company.This is also our first weekly edition of the
      Epoch Brief — we’re switching from monthly to weekly to keep up with our
      growing output. To catch up  on what we published last month, check out
      the “In case you missed it” section below.Subscribe nowNew
      ResearchDiversion and resale: estimating compute smuggling to ChinaSenior
      researcher Isabel Juniewicz estimates that between 290,000 and 1.6 million
      H100-equivalent were smuggled into China through 2025 — our median
      estimate of 660,000 would represent roughly one-third of China's total AI
      computing capacity. The analysis uses two types of evidence: diversion
      from legitimate supply chains and resale within China's grey market.AI
      Chip Components data explorerWe launched a new interactive tool to
      understand the AI chip supply chain, featuring charts that visualize its
      evolution and key constraints since 2024. We track three key components
      required for advanced AI chips: advanced-node logic, high-bandwidth memory
      (HBM), and chip-on-wafer-on-substrate (CoWoS) packaging.Read researcher
      Venkat Somala’s accompanying blog post, which dives into key insights from
      the project, including how high-bandwidth memory has emerged as the
      dominant cost and the primary supply chain bottleneck. If you’re looking
      to get up to speed on AI chips more broadly, we recently published What
      you need to know about AI chips — a general explainer covering  why these
      chips cost tens of thousands of dollars each and why demand consistently
      outstrips supply.CommentaryWe published a new Gradient Update and episode
      of the Epoch After Hours podcast, both tackling the future of AI
      benchmarks.In RIP Classic Reasoning Benchmarks. What’s Next?, senior
      researcher Greg Burnham argues that the classic benchmark recipe — text-
      only, short time horizons, easy to grade, solvable by human experts — is
      now obsolete. What’s next? Relax one of the elements.In the latest episode
      of Epoch After Hours, researcher Anson Ho asks Greg and MirrorCode creator
      Tom Adamczewski, “Are AI benchmarks doomed?” Available on YouTube,
      Spotify, and Apple Podcasts.Data Insight: Anthropic and OpenAI earn more
      revenue per employee than major public tech companiesIn our latest Data
      Insight, researcher Luke Emberson estimates that Anthropic and OpenAI
      generate $9M and $5.5M in revenue per employee, respectively — higher than
      every public tech company on Forbes’ Global 2000 list.Othe... [TRUNCATED]

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

18. TITLE: Automated 310mm Panel-Level Packaging to Accelerate AI Innovation: Tech Brief
   SOURCE: Semiconductor_Engineering | DATE: Thu, 18 Jun 2026 07:01:36 +0000
   URL: https://semiengineering.com/automated-310mm-panel-level-packaging-to-accelerate-ai-innovation-tech-brief/
   MATCHED PILLARS: [PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE]
   EXTRACTED SNIPPET:
      CONTENT:
      This shift to panel-level packaging addresses critical industry
      challenges, including rising interposer sizes and declining wafer-level
      efficiency. The larger panel format supports higher throughput, reduced
      cycle time, and lower cost per package, while enabling integration of
      increasingly complex multi-die architectures. These benefits are
      especially impactful for AI data center and HPC applications, where demand
      for larger package sizes and higher I/O density continues to accelerate.
      The panel-level platform delivers higher throughput through large-area
      processing and reduced tool change steps, while offering a flexible
      foundation for heterogeneous integration and system-in-package (SiP)
      solutions. It supports a wide range of applications including AI, HPC,
      networking, high-end gaming, and edge AI, helping customers meet
      performance targets with greater cost efficiency and faster time-to-
      market.
      Read more here.
      The post Automated 310mm Panel-Level Packaging to Accelerate AI
      Innovation: Tech Brief appeared first on Semiconductor Engineering.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

19. TITLE: Lagging Edge will have a Permanent Glut
   SOURCE: Fabricated_Knowledge | DATE: Thu, 04 Sep 2025 20:20:53 GMT
   URL: https://www.fabricatedknowledge.com/p/lagging-edge-will-have-a-permanent
   MATCHED PILLARS: [MACRO FINANCE, SILICON HARDWARE]
   EXTRACTED SNIPPET:
      CONTENT:
      Hey, it’s been a bit of time. I have been swamped at SemiAnalysis.
      Remember, most of the best work happening in Semiconductors and AI is
      already underway at SemiAnalysis. We offer a diverse range of products, as
      well as numerous job opportunities available. We are currently hiring for
      various roles, including accounting, general operations, sales, and data
      engineering. Today’s post mixes free and paid content. First up: Texas
      Instruments. TI’s quarter was rough—optimism that the analog cycle had
      finally turned fizzled when management said it would cut inventory into
      the supposed “upturn.”As I alluded to earlier, given the inventory
      position that we have right now and depending on what happens on revenue
      next year, we may need to adjust factory loading down in the coming
      quarters for a few quarters until we rectify the inventory situation a bit
      and just stop it from growing and maybe drain it -- and not maybe likely
      drain it for a few quarters. So that would put a headwind on gross
      margins, but it should be temporary for a few quarters until we rectify
      the inventory situation.They’re now guiding to the low end of capex,
      signaling the COVID-era grand capex plan may never be needed. Texas
      Instruments also guided another disappointing quarter; extending the
      lagging-edge slow-motion train wreck.This is the tail of the long
      auto/industrial cycle: a huge upswing followed by a slow bleed. The glut
      has run roughly twice as long as a typical downturn, and even the “green
      shoots” were tariff-distorted. April’s pop was mostly pull-forward; that
      tariff-driven pull-forward was taken as fake demand.Those were pretty
      strong January through April. And April, in particular, were really
      strong. And we think some of that was due to the Liberation Day and some
      of the dynamics that happened there. But then things did slow down after
      April, or at least didn't grow as they normally would have a month on
      month on month. And again, some of that was the Liberation Day potential
      pull-ins. And we talked about that at some length at our July earnings
      release call.And since then, it’s been slowly bleeding out in terms of the
      pull-ins. The run rate of demand is actually lower. My sense is not just
      with TI, but the industry as a whole, the tone was a little different in
      April and May than it was in July and August. And maybe nothing
      quantified, but the tone. And I think that was a function of those orders
      the order trends that I referred to earlier that April was pretty strong.
      And -- but it appears that some of that was pulling Again, it's hard to
      tell with so many permutations on orders and customers, but it looks like
      some of that was pull-ins.There is no lagging-edge upcycle. Global
      capacity looks bloated, especially in categories competing with China’s
      lower-end offerings, where TI sits. Supply and demand here are fragile to
      small changes; the swing factor is incremental Chinese demand.Even a 5%
      supply uptick in an “upswing” would sap incumbents’ pricing power and...
      [TRUNCATED]

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

20. TITLE: Amazon’s AI Resurgence: AWS & Anthropic’s Multi-Gigawatt Trainium Expansion
   SOURCE: SemiAnalysis | DATE: Wed, 03 Sep 2025 20:55:46 +0000
   URL: https://semianalysis.com/2025/09/03/amazons-ai-resurgence-aws-anthropics-multi-gigawatt-trainium-expansion/
   MATCHED PILLARS: [MACRO FINANCE, SILICON HARDWARE]
   EXTRACTED SNIPPET:
      CONTENT:
      Two-and-a-half years ago, we flagged a looming “cloud crisis” at AWS.
      Today, the evidence has mounted. AWS is the crown jewel of the Amazon
      empire, generating ~60% of group profits, and dominating the lucrative
      Cloud Computing market. But it struggles to translate this strength into
      the new GPU/XPU Cloud era.
      Microsoft Azure now leads the market on quarterly new cloud revenue, and
      the gap between Google Cloud and AWS has materially narrowed especially
      with Google’s big moves on the TPU that we’ve been posting about for over
      a month. Markets have noticed. Year-to-date, Amazon is the clear laggard
      among the four tech-and-AI titans as investors mark down the company most
      for losing momentum in AI.
      Source: SemiAnalysis Core Research, company filings
      Today, SemiAnalysis is back with another out-of-consensus call. While the
      market overplays the Cloud Crisis theme, we call for an AWS AI Resurgence.
      We laid out our thesis a month ago to our Core Research subscribers,
      forecasting an upcoming acceleration beyond 20% year-over-year growth by
      the end of 2025.
      Source: SemiAnalysis Core Research
      Subscribe to get notified of all SemiAnalysis articles
      Log in or Subscribe
      By subscribing, you agree to the Privacy Policy and Terms and Conditions.
      Amazon’s savior has a name: Anthropic. The startup has been the clear
      outperformer in the GenAI market in 2025, multiplying revenue fivefold
      year-to-date to reach $5B annualized.
      Source: The Information, Reuters, Bloomberg, SemiAnalysis Core Research
      To keep that trajectory, Anthropic is betting hard on Scaling Laws. While
      Dario’s startup draws fewer headlines than OpenAI, xAI and Meta
      Superintelligence, it isn’t shy about investment. AWS has well over a
      gigawatt of datacenter capacity in final stages of construction for its
      anchor customer. AWS is building datacenters faster than it ever has in
      its entire history. And there’s much more on the horizon.
      Source: SemiAnalysis Datacenter Industry Model
      To understand and forecast GPU/XPU power capacity by AI Lab broken down by
      Cloud Provider, we rely on our proprietary Datacenter Industry Model
      powered by real-time satellite imagery. Trusted by all hyperscalers, AI
      labs, and the world’s largest investors, it provides a quarterly building-
      by-building datacenter forecast for OpenAI, Anthropic, xAI, Meta
      Superintelligence, Google DeepMind, and more. Contact us for more
      information.
      Trainium vs GPUs
      While Amazon’s AI Datacenters are impressive in scale and speed, the
      design of individual building is unremarkable. Hyper-optimized for air-
      cooling, this blueprint is identical to 5-year-old traditional AWS Cloud
      datacenters.
      What makes these facilities unique is their inside: they’ll host the
      world’s largest cluster of non-Nvidia AI chips, with just under a million
      Trainium2 in the largest campus. To understand everything about the
      Trainium2 system, read our December 2024 technical deep dive.
                              Dec 03, 2... [TRUNCATED]

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

21. TITLE: A Conversation with Val Bercovici about Disaggregated Prefill / Decode
   SOURCE: Fabricated_Knowledge | DATE: Mon, 07 Jul 2025 20:04:16 GMT
   URL: https://www.fabricatedknowledge.com/p/a-conversation-with-val-bercovici
   MATCHED PILLARS: [SILICON HARDWARE, PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE]
   EXTRACTED SNIPPET:
      CONTENT:
      This transcript is lightly edited for readability. Doug: Welcome to
      Fabricated Knowledge. This is a podcast edition today, and I have the
      special honor of having Val Bercovici from Weka. And today, we wanted to
      specifically highlight an important trend I think everyone should be
      paying attention to. Disaggregated PD. I also wanted Val the opportunity
      to tell the story of Weka and AI-enabled storage today anyway. So take it
      away Val. Val Bercovici: Thanks, Doug. So, Val Berkevich, Valentin, for
      those who did sometimes see my name online, a long-time infrastructure guy
      focused on storage for most of my career. I ended up being the CTO at
      NetApp about 10 years ago, following a cloud acquisition they made called
      SolidFire.At that time, I was also actively involved with Google in open-
      sourcing their Kubernetes project. That was cool; it helped create and co-
      create the Cloud Native Compute Foundation (CNCF) under the Linux
      Foundation. I enjoyed category creation, and I was relatively early in the
      cloud, early in machine learning, and not so much in general AI, but I'm
      catching up on general AI right now. And yes, I'm at Weka right now,
      focusing as Chief AI Officer on our AI product strategy and marketing and
      education. Because, as we're going to talk about Doug, there are a lot of
      very new and different things happening about infrastructure when you look
      at AI workloads. It bears almost no resemblance to traditional CPU-based
      data centers, and that's what we're going to dive into right now.Doug:
      Yeah, so maybe to start, I do think that the important thing is context,
      right? Things are changing quite rapidly all the time. Let's walk through
      how inference in a single GPU node was done and what has changed recently
      to shake up the entire ecosystem with this disaggregated pre-fill /
      decode. I think a listener needs to understand what pre-fill decode is on
      the traditional node, and then we can discuss what's changing by splitting
      the two.Val Bercovici: Sure, and let's maybe introduce some overall
      financial context here and Semi-Analysis is leading this. But estimates
      are now that about four out of every five dollars of AI is gonna go to
      inference. So inference is not a trivial thing here; it's a very, very
      material thing in the future. One of the reasons why inference matters so
      much is that LLMs, in general, and large reasoning models, in particular,
      are concerned with this aspect.LRMs fundamentally use inference-like
      techniques as part of their test-time computation, which is scaling now in
      the inference dimension far more than in the legacy pre-training
      dimension. So, all of these kinds of workloads matter a lot in terms of
      how infrastructure is allocated and spent, as well as the revenues
      collected from it. So specifically on Disag Prefill, which is a relatively
      new phenomenon. It's mostly a 2025 thing. Some research papers obviously
      were written well before last year, and last year on it. And it's a way to
      scale the entire process of inference... [TRUNCATED]

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

22. TITLE: Chip Industry Week In Review
   SOURCE: Semiconductor_Engineering | DATE: Fri, 19 Jun 2026 07:01:41 +0000
   URL: https://semiengineering.com/chip-industry-week-in-review-143/
   MATCHED PILLARS: [SILICON HARDWARE, SUPPLY CHAIN CHOKEPOINTS, PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE]
   EXTRACTED SNIPPET:
      CONTENT:
      Dealmaking
      Amkor inked a 10-year agreement with TSMC to provide advanced packaging
      and test services in Arizona, tying TSMC’s U.S. fab expansion to domestic
      OSAT capacity.
      Trump said in a post that Apple will partner with Intel on chip design and
      production in the U.S., marking a second reported win for the chipmaker
      this month. Intel Foundry will also reportedly manufacture 3 million TPUs
      for Google. Intel has not confirmed either deal.
      Brewer Science will acquire Heraeus Epurio‘s ultrapure chemical business.
      Amazon is reportedly in talks to sell its custom Trainium AI accelerator
      chips directly to outside companies for use in their own data centers. The
      move comes on the heels of Google’s announcement last month that it will
      sell its TPUs commercially.
      Cadence and HPE expanded their collaboration to accelerate digital twin-
      driven data center modernization.
      IEEE /JSAP Symposium on VLSI Technology & Circuits
      Intel Foundry said its 18A-P process has entered risk production, with
      performance, power, thermal, and via-resistance improvements over 18A. The
      foundry also highlighted longer-term work in CFETs, GaN-on-silicon power
      integration, and ruthenium interconnects (Fig.1 below).
      Sony and imec unveiled a backside connectivity module for high-density 3D
      chip integration.
      SK hynix introduced its 4F² vertical-gate DRAM and its electrical
      characteristics.
      TSMC presented its A16 angstrom-class GAA CMOS platform with Super Power
      Rail BPD.
      ASML, TSMC, and imec demonstrated a 300mm integration flow for 2D-material
      nFETs and pFETs with 50nm contacted poly pitch. The work moves 2D
      transistors closer to manufacturable post-silicon logic.
      Samsung presented its 42nm-pitch 3D stacked FETs/CFET-style logic scaling.
      Fig.1: Intel’s ongoing research. Source: Intel Foundry
      Memory
      CEA-Leti demonstrated 22nm FeRAM with 3D HZO ferroelectric capacitors for
      denser, low-power embedded memory in edge AI.
      SK Hynix shipped samples of its 12-layer HBM4E memory to major customers.
      imec reported advances in ferroelectric memory for more efficient AI
      chips.
      Fraunhofer IPMS and GF researchers integrated hafnium oxide-based ultra-
      fast ferroelectric FRAM memory into GF’s 22FDX technology node, enabling
      fast, energy-efficient data storage.
      NOR flash and SLC NAND contract prices more than doubled in the first half
      of 2026, reported TrendForce.
      Global
      The US government signed a letter of intent to provide Coherent with up to
      $50M to expand InP wafer manufacturing in Texas and finalized a $500M
      award for SandboxAQ to accelerate AI-driven semiconductor materials
      discovery.
      Nokia is expanding its advanced test and packaging operations in
      Pennsylvania to boost U.S. production of photonic chips and optical
      modules used in AI and telecom infrastructure by 10 times its current
      level.
      The S. Korean government launched a ~US$520M program to develop on-device
      AI chips, reports Chosun Biz.
      Rapidus signed an MoU with the UK Semiconductor Centre to explore
      semiconductor manufacturi... [TRUNCATED]

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

23. TITLE: Is a compute crunch coming?
   SOURCE: Epoch_AI | DATE: Tue, 26 May 2026 23:30:04 GMT
   URL: https://epochai.substack.com/p/is-a-compute-crunch-coming
   MATCHED PILLARS: [MACRO FINANCE, SILICON HARDWARE, PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE]
   EXTRACTED SNIPPET:
      CONTENT:
      Gradient Updates shares more opinionated or informal takes on big
      questions in AI progress. These posts solely represent the views of the
      authors, and do not necessarily reflect the views of Epoch AI as a
      whole.Much has been made about AI-driven capex in the past year.
      Hyperscalers have been clamoring to construct massive data centers,
      spending hundreds of billions in the process. The St. Louis Fed estimates
      that AI-related investment contributed about 1 percentage point — almost
      40% of the total — to US real GDP growth in the first three quarters of
      2025, exceeding the IT investment contribution at the height of the dot-
      com boom. Whether the current AI buildout constitutes a bubble depends
      largely on whether there will be sufficient demand for the computing
      infrastructure being built.It’s tough to estimate future demand for
      tokens, as it depends heavily on hard-to-forecast trends in capabilities
      and diffusion. However, we have a much more concrete picture of the supply
      side. In this article, we do our best to answer how many tokens per second
      the world could produce with the chips we have today.To do this, we dig
      into the technical details of inference. We model prefill and decode
      runtimes, account for two common efficiency techniques (chunked prefill
      and speculative decoding), and calibrate against data from SemiAnalysis’s
      InferenceX, a repository of real-world inference experiments. Our results
      suggest these chips could serve between 500 million and 20 billion output
      tokens per second from a Kimi K2.6-like model as of Q4 2025, depending on
      the context length of requests. We also find that global inference
      capacity is more than tripling each year, as more computing infrastructure
      is deployed and chips become more efficient.We compare these supply
      estimates to several (imperfect) proxies for token demand and its growth
      trend, including the growth of tokens served across Google platforms, and
      the intensity of token usage today at the largest tech companies,
      extrapolated to all software engineers worldwide. These figures suggest
      that demand at current prices could be between 200 million and 4 billion
      tokens per second, growing by roughly 10× per year — plausibly outpacing
      supply growth in the near future, if not already. However, these estimates
      are highly uncertain. For one, we don’t know the average size of the
      models behind current demand. Aggregate token figures also obscure an
      underlying trend in model efficiency, which both lowers the cost of
      producing tokens at a given quality, and introduces new demand as
      additional use cases become cost-effective.If these trends continue, a
      compute crunch is likely near — particularly for the long-context
      workloads that drive agentic AI. This will drive up the price of access to
      frontier capabilities for those willing to pay, while everyday users shift
      to cheaper, smaller models. It may also mean that AI companies increase
      their focus on developing more efficient ways to serve models. Because
      of... [TRUNCATED]

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

24. TITLE: Engels' Pause and the Permanent Underclass
   SOURCE: Fabricated_Knowledge | DATE: Wed, 15 Apr 2026 19:15:28 GMT
   URL: https://www.fabricatedknowledge.com/p/mythos-and-engels-pause
   MATCHED PILLARS: [SILICON HARDWARE, PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE]
   EXTRACTED SNIPPET:
      CONTENT:
      Mythos to me is yet another game changer. It is interesting to see that
      the naysayers of bubble talk have started to abate, while general optimism
      (and paranoia) about model improvement continues. Mythos is actually some
      kind of step change, and the fact that anyone with access to the model
      could in theory find zero day exploits with a simple prompt is ground
      breaking. I’d argue that a machine that can find zero day exploits at
      scale is proof of human cybersecurity researcher displacement. And Project
      Glasswing from this perspective (as well as saving compute) seems like a
      worthy cause. Fabricated Knowledge is a reader-supported publication. To
      receive new posts and support my work, consider becoming a free or paid
      subscriber.I think we continue and will continue to underestimate this
      different kind of intelligence. It is truly novel to hold the entire
      problem to solve in a single context window and run attention over the
      entire context simultaneously rather than sequential human analysis. It’s
      clear there is a big breakthrough that will augment and partially displace
      labor. Mythos is a level of performance that leads to meaningful
      disruption. The Mythos model found thousands of critical vulnerabilities
      that survived decades of review. The John Henry moment of man versus
      machine has already passed. The machine is likely at superhuman levels of
      performance, especially when it comes to information processing. So today
      I want to talk about and introduce a concept that I think will become a
      much broader phrase in the public sphere in the coming month. And that is
      "Engels’ Pause.”What is Engels’ Pause Engels’ pause is a term coined by
      economic historian Robert C. Allen to describe the period from 1780 to
      1840 when a curious pattern happened during the midst of the industrial
      revolution. British working-class wages stagnated while per-capita GDP
      expanded rapidly during the industrial revolution, aka the most
      consequential technology transition in human history to date. The math is
      something like this: economists Charles Harley and Nicholas Crafts
      estimated per-capita growth at 46% between 1780 and 1840. Charles
      Feinstein found that working-class wages during the period increased by
      only 12%. That’s a meaningful gap for workers during one of the most
      transformative periods in human history. So what caused it? This is
      actually a bit of a debate. The analysis suggests that Artisan workers in
      the domestic system were replaced by machines, often tended by children.
      The displacement effect was high earning middle class artisans got
      displaced by capital and the cheapest labor possible. The returns of this
      output were extremely uneven, corporate profits were captured by
      industrialists who reinvested them heavily into more factories and more
      machines. The destruction in wages was not about unskilled workers, but
      rather hyper focused on a specific class of skilled artisan middle class
      workers who commanded a hefty premium. There actually was a bit of a...
      [TRUNCATED]

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

25. TITLE: GPT-5 Set the Stage for Ad Monetization and the SuperApp
   SOURCE: SemiAnalysis | DATE: Wed, 13 Aug 2025 00:27:14 +0000
   URL: https://semianalysis.com/2025/08/13/gpt-5-ad-monetization-and-the-superapp/
   MATCHED PILLARS: [MACRO FINANCE, SILICON HARDWARE]
   EXTRACTED SNIPPET:
      CONTENT:
      To many power users (Pro and Plus), GPT5 was a disappointing release. But
      with closer inspection, the real release is focused on the vast majority
      of ChatGPT’s users, which is the 700m+ free userbase that is growing
      rapidly. Power users should be disappointed; this release wasn’t for them.
      The real consumer opportunity for OpenAI lies with the largest user base,
      and getting the unmonetized users who currently use ChatGPT infrequently
      in their day-to-day to indirectly pay is their largest opportunity.
      Analysts focused on the model capabilities are missing the much larger
      context of network effects that ChatGPT is gaining quickly. In November of
      2023, ChatGPT wasn’t even in the top 100 websites; now it is number 5.
      Larger than X/Twitter, Reddit, Whatsapp, Wikipedia, and quickly
      approaching Instagram, Facebook, Youtube and Google. On the top 10 list,
      every single property is much older than ChatGPT.com, and the sheer
      number of unmonetized users is staggering.
      But that changes with GPT-5. OpenAI is laying the groundwork to monetize
      one of the largest and fastest-growing web properties in the world, and it
      all begins with the router.
      The Router is the Release
      On OpenAI’s release website, the second paragraph is about the “One United
      System,” specifically focused on the router. The wording is instructive.
      GPT‑5 is a unified system with a smart, efficient model that answers most
      questions, a deeper reasoning model (GPT‑5 thinking) for harder problems,
      and a real‑time router that quickly decides which to use based on
      conversation type, complexity, tool needs, and your explicit intent (for
      example, if you say “think hard about this” in the prompt). The router is
      continuously trained on real signals, including when users switch models,
      preference rates for responses, and measured correctness, improving over
      time. Once usage limits are reached, a mini version of each model handles
      remaining queries. In the near future, we plan to integrate these
      capabilities into a single model.
      The router serves multiple purposes on both the cost and performance side.
      On the cost side, routing users to mini versions of each model allows
      OpenAI to service users with lower costs. On the performance side, it will
      enable many users to use thinking aka CoT (Chain of Thought) reasoning for
      the first time. Over 99% of the free users have yet to interact with a
      thinking model like o3, and for the average user, ChatGPT just got a huge
      upgrade. The number of free users exposed to thinking models went up 7x in
      the first day and the number of paying users up nearly 3.5x.
      Source: OpenAI, SemiAnalysis
      But the router is clearly a feature to the new service, and can likely see
      improvements or changes over time. It will continuously learn on
      preference rates and OpenAI promises it will improve over time. It just
      takes a single additional attribute to begin the path to monetization: the
      commercial value of the query. 
      We believe that the Router is... [TRUNCATED]

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

26. TITLE: Are AI benchmarks doomed?
   SOURCE: Epoch_AI | DATE: Fri, 01 May 2026 22:23:35 GMT
   URL: https://epochai.substack.com/p/are-ai-benchmarks-doomed
   MATCHED PILLARS: [SILICON HARDWARE, SUPPLY CHAIN CHOKEPOINTS]
   EXTRACTED SNIPPET:
      CONTENT:
      Greg Burnham leads Epoch’s benchmarking team. Tom Adamczewski is a senior
      research engineer who develops new benchmarks, including MirrorCode.Topics
      we cover: why benchmark saturation isn’t as alarming as it seems, how AI
      can speed up benchmark development, the benchmark-reality gap, whether an
      AGI benchmark can exist, and the role of human evaluation in future
      benchmarks.We also discuss MirrorCode, a benchmark (co-developed by Epoch
      and METR) of long-horizon coding tasks, and FrontierMath: Open Problems,
      Epoch’s benchmark of real unsolved math research problems.Subscribe
      nowWatch the episode here:SpotifyTranscriptThis is an edited transcript of
      the “Epoch After Hours” podcast.Are AI benchmarks doomed?
      [00:00:36]AnsonSo AI benchmarks seem to have a really big problem right
      now. If you look at all of the AI benchmarks, it seems like most of them
      are saturating really, really quickly. And by really quickly, I mean
      months for most of them. If they’re really, really good, maybe they’ll
      last for a year or two. But then for the most part, it seems like it’s
      very hard to build a benchmark that can last quite a long period of
      time.So there’s a looming question that revolves around all of this: are
      AI benchmarks doomed? To start off, I’d like to get a nice little vibe
      check of where you guys stand on whether AI benchmarks are doomed. So what
      do you guys think?TomSo I think benchmarks will continue to be important
      as long as people want to have some kind of qualitative description of
      what an AI system can do, or want to quickly compare when a new model
      comes out — which one is better. And so it seems like we’re sort of stuck
      with benchmarks, regardless of the many flaws that they might have, just
      because there is this obvious demand for information, this gap that they
      fill.We might be in a situation where benchmarks are less useful than they
      used to be. Like they explain less of all that we might want to know about
      AI systems’ performance. But there’s still additional information, and so
      people are going to continue to release new benchmarks and look at
      benchmark results.GregI’m a bit more of an optimist in this perspective.
      I’d almost say we’re living through a golden age of benchmarking, where it
      used to be that I think models were not that capable and there was only so
      much for benchmarks to say. Now models are much more capable, but this
      just means there’s much more for benchmarks to potentially tell us.So
      maybe, as Tom was saying, the percentage of questions you might want
      benchmarks to answer that benchmarks actually answer might be shrinking.
      But the amount of information we’re gleaning from benchmarks, I think in
      some sort of absolute terms, is growing.And I think this is very exciting.
      I think benchmarks will survive and be important and even potentially
      central, so long as there are things we are curious whether AI systems can
      do — and that seems like there’s still plenty of questions about what AI
      systems can do. I think there are some... [TRUNCATED]

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

27. TITLE: The Death of Software 2.0 (A Better Analogy!)
   SOURCE: Fabricated_Knowledge | DATE: Fri, 16 Jan 2026 14:26:18 GMT
   URL: https://www.fabricatedknowledge.com/p/the-death-of-software-20-a-better
   MATCHED PILLARS: [SILICON HARDWARE]
   EXTRACTED SNIPPET:
      CONTENT:
      When I last wrote about software, I received significant pushback. Today,
      I believe that Claude Code is confirming the original case I had all
      along. Software is going to become an output of hardware and an extension
      of current hardware designs. With this in mind, I want to write today
      about how I see software changing from here. But let’s start with one core
      conviction. Claude Code is the glimpse of the future. Assuming it
      improves, has harnesses, and can continue to scale large context windows
      and only become marginally more intelligent, I believe this is enough to
      really take us to the next state of AI. I cannot stress enough that Claude
      Code is the ChatGPT moment repeated. You must try it to understand. One
      day, the successor to Claude Code will make a superhuman interface
      available to everyone. And if Tokens were TCP/IP, Claude Code is the first
      genuine website built in the age of AI. And this is going to hurt a large
      part of the software industry.  Software (Especially Seat Based) is in for
      a Much Rougher RideThe environment may be rough at OpenAI, but at a
      traditional SaaS company, there is likely no greater whiplash than SaaS is
      eating the world in 2012 to Saas is screwed today. The stocks reflect it;
      multiple compression in the companies has been painful and will persist.
      Source: EODHDThis is structural. I believe it’s time to rethink software’s
      value proposition, and I have what I consider the best analogy for what
      the future holds. Afterwards, we will digest what Software will look like
      as an extension of computing, because I believe that Claude Code resembles
      the memory hierarchy in computing. Let’s explain. The New Model of
      Software Claude Code (and subsequent innovations) clearly will change a
      lot about software, but the typical (and right) pushback is that you
      cannot use “non-deterministic software” for defined business practices.
      However, there is a persistent design pattern in hardware that addresses
      this difference: the memory hierarchy. No one can rely on anything in a
      computer's non-persistent memory, yet it is one of the most valuable
      components of the entire stack. For those unfamiliar with computer
      science, there is a memory hierarchy that trades capacity and persistence
      for speed, and the system works because there are handoffs between levels.
      In the traditional stack, SRAM sits at the top; overflow is to DRAM, which
      is non-persistent (if you turn it off, it goes away), and then to NAND,
      which is persistent (if you turn it off, it persists).I don’t think it’s
      worth matching the hierarchy too closely, but I believe that Claude Code
      and Agent Next will be the non-persistent memory stack in the compute
      stack. Claude Code is DRAM. Source:
      https://computerscience.chemeketa.edu/cs160Reader/ComputerArchitecture/MemoryHeirarchy.htmlI
      believe that AI and software will be an extension of this, and we can
      already identify which layers correspond to which.  The “CPU” in the
      hierarchy comprises raw information, and the fast me... [TRUNCATED]

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

28. TITLE: Intel's One True Stakeholder is Here
   SOURCE: Fabricated_Knowledge | DATE: Fri, 15 Aug 2025 20:01:13 GMT
   URL: https://www.fabricatedknowledge.com/p/intels-one-true-stakeholder-is-here
   MATCHED PILLARS: [MACRO FINANCE, SUPPLY CHAIN CHOKEPOINTS]
   EXTRACTED SNIPPET:
      CONTENT:
      Finally, after all this time, I think the endgame for Intel might be here.
      If you missed the news, there is a rumor that the Trump administration
      could be taking a stake in Intel. This feels like a long time coming, but
      the incompetent board is still fighting. For more work on the board, read
      both mine and SemiAnalysis’s pieces. Source: WSJ The final stakeholder is
      here, and Intel needs to do a better job of capturing its attention and
      help. Let’s walk through a brief recap of how we got here and where Intel
      could go from here. Intel is a Walking Death Intel was once the greatest
      semiconductor that ever was. And I cannot express how true this was.
      Nvidia is the shining star today, but it didn’t invent as many
      foundational technologies as Intel did. Intel’s story is THE story of
      Semiconductors. From the Traitorous Eight leaving Shockley’s lab, to Bob
      Noyce leaving Fairchild to then found Intel, the history of Semiconductors
      IS the history of Intel. Intel invented the concept of the Microprocessor,
      a CPU itself, and made the world’s first commercial RAM, among other
      innovations such as strained silicon, high-k metal, and FinFETs. And it’s
      no surprise that the future of American semiconductors has Intel written
      all over it. But there’s no other way than forward, and I think it’s time
      to consider what needs to happen realistically, and that’s the death of
      the Intel we once knew to make room for what’s next. The key is that while
      CPUs don’t matter, the only American leading-edge foundry left making them
      is critical. The problem is that the company that funds it might run out
      of money, and that’s why they need to publicly threaten to stop financing
      the future of the foundry, because it’s a problem they can’t do alone.
      That is why I believe they so publicly announced the ending of future
      nodes past 14A. If you want us to continue, we need help. It’s time to
      threaten the future of America to the one stakeholder that matters: The
      Government. Intel’s Foundry Must Live, at Any CostThe calculus for America
      is pretty simple. In my view, there is very little strategic importance to
      the Intel CPU business. The x86 ecosystem was once the most incredible
      compute ecosystem, but AMD designs better chips than Intel could; Intel
      has the one thing that AMD does not, a Fab. The fabless business at Intel
      has a real issue in that making a CPU is becoming a relatively
      commoditized business. ARM has made it possible for almost any hyperscaler
      to have its ARM-based CPU, while AMD continues to outdesign Intel at its
      core job, and that’s not even discussing the longer-term RISC-V
      ecosystem.Adding up the CPU side, I see a business with massive
      competition and Intel not at the top of the stack. Intel has to deal with
      increasing competition in’s core profit center while at the same time
      covering the increasingly heavy burden of a leading-edge fab. There is
      only one leading-edge foundry (TSMC), and a second American option is the
      single highest value-added project of all... [TRUNCATED]

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

29. TITLE: H100 vs GB200 NVL72 Training Benchmarks – Power, TCO, and Reliability Analysis, Software Improvement Over Time
   SOURCE: SemiAnalysis | DATE: Wed, 20 Aug 2025 04:56:35 +0000
   URL: https://semianalysis.com/2025/08/20/h100-vs-gb200-nvl72-training-benchmarks/
   MATCHED PILLARS: [MACRO FINANCE, SILICON HARDWARE, PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE]
   EXTRACTED SNIPPET:
      CONTENT:
      Frontier model training has pushed GPUs and AI systems to their absolute
      limits, making cost, efficiency, power, performance per TCO, and
      reliability central to the discussion on effective training. The Hopper vs
      Blackwell comparisons are not as simple as Nvidia would have you believe.
      In this report, we will start by present the results of benchmark runs
      across over 2,000 H100 GPUs, analyzing data on model flops utilization
      (MFU), total cost of ownership (TCO) and cost per training 1M tokens. We
      will also discuss energy use, examining the energy in utility Joules
      consumed for each token trained and compare it to the average US household
      annual energy usage, reframing power efficiency in societal context. We
      will also show the results of this analysis when scaling the GPU cluster
      from 128 H100s to 2048 H100s and across different versions of Nvidia
      software.
      Later in this report, we will also analyze GB200 NVL72 benchmark results
      across Llama4 400B MoE and DeepSeek 670B MoE and compare this data to our
      earlier results from the H100. We will discuss whether the GB200 NVL72
      performance per $ advantages survives once reliability issues are factored
      in.
      Downtime from poor reliability and lost engineering time is one of the
      main factors that we will capture in our perf per TCO calculations.
      Currently there are no large-scale training runs done yet on GB200 NVL72
      as software continues to mature and reliability challenges are worked
      through. This means that Nvidia’s H100 and H200 as well as Google TPUs
      remain the only GPUs that are today being successfully used to complete
      frontier-scale training. As it stands today, even the most advanced
      operators at frontier labs and CSPs are not yet able to carry out mega
      training runs on the GB200 NVL72.
      With that said, every new architecture naturally requires time for the
      ecosystem to ramp software to effectively utilize the architecture. The
      GB200 NVL72 ramp is slightly slower than prior generations, but not by
      much, and we are confident that before the end of the year, GB200 NVL72
      software would have improved considerably. Combined with frontier models
      architecture being codesigned with the larger scale up world size in mind,
      we expect that there will be significant efficiency gains from using the
      GB200 NVL72 by the end of the year.
      On the reliability front, there will continue to be significant challenges
      that Nvidia must work even closer with its partners to rapidly solve, but
      we think the ecosystem will quickly rally its resources towards tackling
      these reliability challenges.
      SemiAnalysis Is Hiring
      We are looking for a new grad engineer to join our engineering team. This
      is an unique opportunity to work on an high-visibility special projects
      with support from many industry leaders and CEOs. If you’re passionate
      about performance engineering, system reliability, and want to work at the
      intersection of hardware and software, this is a rare chance to make
      industry wide impact.What... [TRUNCATED]

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

30. TITLE: Intel 18A Details & Cost, Future of DRAM 4F2 vs 3D, Backside Power Adoption (or Not), China’s FlipFET, Digital Twins from Atoms to Fabs, and More
   SOURCE: SemiAnalysis | DATE: Mon, 21 Jul 2025 14:23:37 +0000
   URL: https://semianalysis.com/2025/07/21/vlsi2025/
   MATCHED PILLARS: [SILICON HARDWARE, SUPPLY CHAIN CHOKEPOINTS, PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE]
   EXTRACTED SNIPPET:
      CONTENT:
      Long time readers will recall that SemiAnalysis covers more than just
      datacenters and AMD. Today we’re back to semiconductors with a tech-
      focused roundup of the best from this year’s VLSI conference, the premiere
      design and integration. That includes the latest in chips manufacturing:
      fab digital twins, the future of advanced logic transistors and
      interconnects, DRAM architectures beyond the 1x nm nodes, and more. We’ll
      discuss Intel’s 18A process and compare with TSMC, where backside power
      will be adopted (and where it won’t), and the likely winners in 4F2 versus
      3D DRAM.
      Digital Twins: From Atoms to Fabs
      Semiconductor design and fabrication is getting exponentially more
      complex, increasing development costs and lengthening design cycles.
      Digital twins allow for design exploration and optimization to be done in
      an accelerated virtual environment. With this, engineers can ensure that
      designs work before any silicon is run through the fab.
      Digital twins span the entire scale of semiconductor design:
      Atomic-level: Simulate the quantum and Newtonian interactions between
      atoms in materials engineering of transistor contacts and gates
      Wafer-level: Optimize tool chambers and process recipes in virtual silicon
      for yield and performance
      Fab-level: Maximize fab productivity with orchestrated maintenance and
      management across the fleet
      Source: Synopsys
      On atomistic simulations, Synopsys provided an overview of their
      QuantumATK suite, used in materials engineering in transistor contacts and
      gate oxide stack design, which are critical to device performance.
      Traditional Density Functional Theory (DFT) modelling of quantum effects
      between atoms is the most accurate but computationally expensive, while
      conventional force field simulation of Newtonian atomic interactions is
      quick but with limited accuracy. GPU accelerated DFT-NEGF (Non-Equilibrium
      Green’s Function) demonstrated a 9.3x speedup using only 4x A100 vs CPU,
      while Machine-Learned Force Field simulation using Moment Tensor
      Potentials demonstrated near-DFT accuracy with 17 min compute cost vs 12
      days with traditional DFT.
      Source: Synopsys
      These atomic models are critical in understanding the electrical
      interactions occurring at the interface between different material layers.
      In contact engineering, MLFF is used to generate the contact interface
      between crystalline silicon and amorphous silicides, simulating the depth
      of interdiffusion where the boundary undergoes silicidation. DFT-NEGF is
      then used to calculate contact resistance and current-voltage curves
      across the interface. For gate oxide design, the complex multi-layer work
      function metal stack is built using MLFF and simulated to check its
      structure and chemical composition. Dipole dopants can then be introduced
      and optimized with DFT, which also does electrostatic analysis to
      calculate key parameters such as effective work function, Schottky barrier
      height and equivalent oxide thickness. As we move forwar... [TRUNCATED]

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

31. TITLE: The Epoch Brief - May 22, 2026
   SOURCE: Epoch_AI | DATE: Fri, 22 May 2026 22:54:57 GMT
   URL: https://epochai.substack.com/p/the-epoch-brief-may-22-2026
   MATCHED PILLARS: [MACRO FINANCE, SILICON HARDWARE, PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE]
   EXTRACTED SNIPPET:
      CONTENT:
      In this week’s Epoch Brief:Our newest Data Insight finds memory is now the
      largest and fastest-growing component cost for leading AI chip designers,
      rising from 52% to 63% of total component spending since early 2024.In the
      latest Gradient Update, Josh You argues that top frontier labs could
      dramatically increase their share of global AI compute usage in the next
      few years — after which, continued scaling would require an economic
      transformation.FrontierMath: Open Problems workshops begin May 26.
      Applications are still open.Subscribe nowData Insights: Memory has grown
      to nearly two-thirds of AI chip component costs.Researcher Venkat Somala
      finds that high-bandwidth memory (HBM) has grown from 52% to 63% of total
      AI chip component spending between Q1 2024 and Q4 2025, faster than any
      other component. HBM spend across chips designed by Nvidia, AMD, Google,
      and Amazon rose from roughly $12 billion in 2024 to $32 billion in
      2025.Commentary: Frontier labs don’t use most AI compute (yet)In our
      latest Gradient Update, researcher Josh You estimates that while leading
      labs today use less than half of global AI compute, they could absorb most
      of the available headroom within a few years. At that point, continued
      growth would be capped by chip supply. For scaling to continue, the
      overall compute buildout would need to accelerate. Given that AI capital
      expenditure is already approaching $1 trillion per year, such an
      acceleration in compute production would require dramatic economic
      changes. Gradient Updates are informal, opinionated analyses that
      represent the views of individual authors, not Epoch AI as a whole.Other
      UpdatesFM:OP workshopsOur in-person FrontierMath: Open Problems workshops
      kick off Tuesday in New York City, with subsequent events in London,
      Berkeley, Boston, Los Angeles, and Toronto through June 9.  The goal of
      the workshops is to identify highly interesting and programmatically
      verifiable unsolved research math problems. All working mathematicians
      (grad students, postdocs, and professors) are encouraged to apply while
      spots remain.CareersWe’re hiring across several roles. All positions are
      fully remote.Designer to translate complex research into intuitive,
      engaging, and high-impact designs — primarily UI/UX and data visualization
      work.Researchers and Senior Researchers to lead new projects across our
      expanding teams.Data Scientist (Contract) to assist with our AI research
      efforts, including reviewing technical literature, tracking benchmark
      data, and analyzing AI models, data centers, and companies.Applications
      are rolling, so apply soon!Subscribe nowIn case you missed
      it…Research:Servers account for 60% of the total cost of owning a one-
      gigawatt AI data center (May 14)Claude overperforms at software
      engineering and underperforms at math (May 15)Commentary:Why a handful of
      AI researchers command 10–100× the pay of their peers — and why that gap
      could grow (May 13)

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

32. TITLE: The Epoch Brief - May 15, 2026
   SOURCE: Epoch_AI | DATE: Fri, 15 May 2026 21:04:13 GMT
   URL: https://epochai.substack.com/p/the-epoch-brief-may-15-2026
   MATCHED PILLARS: [PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE]
   EXTRACTED SNIPPET:
      CONTENT:
      Welcome to this edition of the Epoch Brief! This week:We published two new
      Data Insights: Servers account for 60% of the total cost of owning a one-
      gigawatt AI data center, and Claude overperforms at software engineering
      and underperforms at math.The latest Gradient Update explores why a
      handful of AI researchers command 10–100× the pay of their peers — and why
      that gap could grow.Subscribe nowData InsightsWe published two new Data
      Insights, our digestible snapshots of complex AI trends.Servers account
      for 60% of the total cost of ownership of a one-gigawatt AI data center.
      GovAI research scholar Amelia Michael and Epoch senior researcher Ben
      Cottier model the full costs of a typical one-gigawatt US AI data center,
      finding that servers alone account for $5 billion of the $8.5 billion
      annual total — dwarfing energy and all other operating costs.Claude
      overperforms at software engineering and underperforms at math. Senior
      researcher Alexander Barry finds that, relative to their general Epoch
      Capabilities Index (ECI) values, Anthropic’s Claude models overperform on
      software engineering benchmarks and underperform on math. These results
      come from the Domain-specific ECI Explorer we launched earlier this month,
      where you can view Math and SWE ECIs as well as design your own
      variant.Commentary: The economics of superstar AI researchersIn our latest
      Gradient Update, researcher Anson Ho argues that enormous pay disparities
      among AI researchers — where superstar researchers can earn 10–100× what
      their colleagues make — come down to more than just quality differences.
      Rather, we should expect to see big differences in pay even if superstars
      are only a tiny bit better than an average postdoc. Gradient Updates are
      informal, opinionated analyses that represent the views of individual
      authors, not Epoch AI as a whole. Ballpark estimates of AI researcher
      compensation. Postdoc compensation is estimated using NSF report data. For
      tenure-track professors, the author anchors on this Taulbee 2024 survey of
      computer scientists. Compensation for frontier lab researchers is
      estimated from Levels.fyi for L4-L5 OpenAI researchers, and news reports
      for superstars.Other UpdatesFM:OP workshopsOur in-person FrontierMath:
      Open Problems workshops kick off in under two weeks. Events will be held
      in six cities — New York, London, Berkeley, Boston, Los Angeles, and
      Toronto — between May 26 and June 9. All working mathematicians (grad
      students, postdocs, professors) are encouraged to apply while space
      remains. Model EvaluationsWe are conducting an AI-assisted review of
      FrontierMath: Tiers 1–4 and have flagged fatal errors in about a third of
      problems — most of which we believe to be valid. We will release updated
      scores on a corrected dataset after completing a thorough human
      review.CareersWe’re hiring across several roles. All positions are fully
      remote.Designer to translate complex research into intuitive, engaging,
      and high-impact designs — primarily UI/UX and data vis... [TRUNCATED]

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

33. TITLE: Huawei Ascend Production Ramp: Die Banks, TSMC Continued Production, HBM is The Bottleneck
   SOURCE: SemiAnalysis | DATE: Mon, 08 Sep 2025 09:54:57 +0000
   URL: https://semianalysis.com/2025/09/08/huawei-ascend-production-ramp/
   MATCHED PILLARS: [SILICON HARDWARE, SUPPLY CHAIN CHOKEPOINTS]
   EXTRACTED SNIPPET:
      CONTENT:
      Compute is the lifeblood of AI. He who controls the spice controls the
      universe the compute will control the production of tokens and reap the
      benefits of AI. Without compute you do not have a seat at the table. The
      United States technology community is all in on compute and AI as the next
      platform and is now adding compute at a staggering pace.
      There is competition, and it not only comes from companies but from
      countries, and the US government has placed a series of export controls to
      limit China’s rising compute. Today the US controls and is the undisputed
      leader in compute with more than 70% of the worlds deployed FLOPs. One way
      to stay ahead is to keep going full steam while hindering your
      competition. Limiting your competitor nation state from compute, which
      will limit them from intelligence, is the current policy to stay ahead in
      the AI race.
      These moves have led to backlash, including with China cutting rare earth
      minerals and magnets off from the US. Secretary of Commerce Howard Lutnick
      says the resumption of Nvidia GPU sales to China were required to restart
      China’s shipments of their linchpin supply chain materials.
      But constraints have also led to adaptation, and Chinese companies have
      adapted. High batch sizes and disaggregated serving are but two examples.
      Despite advances, in the case of DeepSeek, most of their tokens are still
      inferenced on western hardware. We wrote about this dynamic in our recent
      DeepSeek debrief. Training of DeepSeek’s next generation model was also
      delayed by the use of Huawei chips, as we also said in the debrief.
                              Jul 03, 2025                    DeepSeek Debrief:
      >128 Days Later 
                              Wei Zhou, AJ Kourabi, Dylan Patel
      This is not a stable equilibrium. There are always moving pieces in the
      race for intelligence. Beijing plans for the long term and knows it must
      secure its own domestic compute destiny. There is an irony: in the 2010s
      China kicked out Google to enforce its Great Firewall and foster its
      domestic industry, this time the US government is withholding hardware
      technology so they cannot seize the lead in AI.
      We believe that at China’s core, they want to control not only its
      internet and AI, but the hardware that supports it. From silicon to
      tokens, China seeks sovereignty over every layer of the stack, and given
      recent history will never want to be beholden to foreign powers. Enter
      Huawei.
      China loves national champions, and in it’s characteristic capitalism,
      tends to funnel resources to a few national champions. Today’s champion is
      probably Nvidia’s greatest adversary: Huawei. We expect Huawei to be able
      to make millions of chips this year, and to be bottlenecked by HBM next
      year. Today we want to talk about Huawei, which can translate as “China’s
      achievement”.
      All In with Huawei’s chips
      Huawei is the key piece for China’s compute destiny. Huawei’s chip
      ecosystem is vertically integrated and capable network of tools, fabs, and
      design that allows it to express a f... [TRUNCATED]

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

34. TITLE: Where We Go From Here
   SOURCE: Fabricated_Knowledge | DATE: Thu, 02 Oct 2025 12:59:47 GMT
   URL: https://www.fabricatedknowledge.com/p/where-we-go-from-here
   MATCHED PILLARS: [SILICON HARDWARE]
   EXTRACTED SNIPPET:
      CONTENT:
      First, let’s start with the fact that this is massively speculative. No
      one can guess or know the future of anything, and today’s post is my guess
      of the entire animal spirits of the market. I am going to make a call here
      - we are going to go into a GPU lead bubble. This is a follow-up to my
      last post, but I will provide a more detailed write-up here (and
      additional quantitative follow-ups at SemiAnalysis).
                    Read more

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

35. TITLE: Robotics Levels of Autonomy
   SOURCE: SemiAnalysis | DATE: Wed, 30 Jul 2025 17:02:25 +0000
   URL: https://semianalysis.com/2025/07/30/robotics-levels-of-autonomy/
   MATCHED PILLARS: [MACRO FINANCE, SILICON HARDWARE]
   EXTRACTED SNIPPET:
      CONTENT:
      Robots have powered manufacturing for decades, yet they stayed single-
      purpose and thrived only in perfect settings. Previous attempts at
      intelligent machines overpromised and underdelivered. But they were too
      early. Today, modern AI paradigms convert most robot roadblocks into data
      problems and push machines toward capabilities once thought impossible. As
      these models absorb real-world experience, robots will sharpen current
      skills, gain new ones, and deploy faster, absorbing ever-increasing shares
      of labor.
                              Mar 11, 2025                    America Is Missing
      The New Labor Economy – Robotics Part 1
                              Dylan Patel, Reyk Knuhtsen, Niko Ciminelli,
      Jeremie Eliahou Ontiveros, Joe Ryu, Robert Ghilduta
      General-purpose robots that can accurately perform any task in any domain
      is now an inevitability, and mass labor replacement is on the horizon.
      However, these robots will arrive in levels, slowly adding more
      capabilities until all tasks are feasible. To provide a barometer for this
      progress, we introduce our industry-first “Robotics Levels of Autonomy,”
      which classifies robotics into 5 distinct Levels. 
      Source: SemiAnalysis
      Each Level of Autonomy is defined by the capability unlocked, and each
      builds sequentially on those before it to enable new applications. To
      ground these Levels, we provide data-driven analysis of current
      deployments, use cases and economics, current challenges, and active areas
      of progress. The Levels provide a type of task segmentation in which
      progress is additive — robots may target one Level of tasks and still
      benefit from capabilities developed in other Levels.
      Our Levels of Autonomy are demarcated around commercial viability — not
      merely what is possible. Robot autonomy is inherently linked to
      applications: creating value only through actions often irrecoverable.
      Therefore, capabilities are derived from reliability and capability. Once
      reliability is proven, the robot must deliver sufficient throughput to
      justify its cost as well.
      Thank You
      We’ve talked extensively to top scientists, surveyed numerous companies,
      traveled to top industry conferences, and dug into research surrounding
      contemporary robotics to develop this taxonomy.
      We deeply appreciate the invaluable contribution of our coauthors:
      industry practitioners Niko Ciminelli, Joe Ryu, and Robert Ghilduta. We
      take inspiration from coauthor Joe Ryu’s framework to flesh out this
      classification. This project couldn’t be done without the help of outside
      experts.
      Source: SemiAnalysis
      We welcome feedback: Please reach out to discuss anything regarding our
      new Levels of Autonomy classification. You can meet us in person at most
      of the top industry events, such as Humanoids Summit SF, CoRL, Humanoids
      2025 Seoul, and more.
      Describing Autonomy
      The path to full autonomy begins with accurate, single-purpose systems.
      But general-purpose robots must start anew, learning to see, plan,
      interact, and achieve exceptional accuracy. Along the... [TRUNCATED]

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

36. TITLE: OpenAI Stargate: where the US sites stand
   SOURCE: Epoch_AI | DATE: Mon, 20 Apr 2026 16:57:57 GMT
   URL: https://epochai.substack.com/p/openai-stargate-where-the-us-sites
   MATCHED PILLARS: [SILICON HARDWARE, PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE]
   EXTRACTED SNIPPET:
      CONTENT:
      Updated April 23, 2026IntroductionThe United States is in the middle of an
      unprecedented build-out of AI infrastructure. No project illustrates the
      scale of that effort more than Stargate, a $500 billion endeavor involving
      AI developer OpenAI, cloud provider Oracle, and investment company
      SoftBank.Stargate has seven locations across the US, all of which are now
      showing active development. The most advanced—in Abilene, Texas—is already
      operating at an estimated capacity of 0.3 gigawatts (GW).1 The six other
      sites include two more in Texas, as well as facilities in New Mexico,
      Wisconsin, Michigan, and Ohio. Together, the seven sites add up to over 9
      GW of planned capacity, which is comparable to the peak power demand of
      New York City.2 This will be enough to power the equivalent of 20 million
      Nvidia H100 GPUs, which was the total amount of AI compute in the world by
      the end of 2025.3Thanks for reading! Subscribe for free to receive new
      posts and support our work.Stargate’s design choices reveal how builders
      are navigating the key challenges of gigawatt-scale AI data centers in the
      US. To sidestep lengthy queues for connecting to energy grids, at least
      three of the seven sites will make use of on-site natural gas plants. To
      address public concerns about water usage, at least six sites will use
      closed-loop liquid cooling systems, which do not evaporate water.4 These
      decisions will likely save the project time but raise the cost of the
      facilities.Based on announcements from 2025, SoftBank will own the
      hardware at the Milam County and Ohio sites, while Oracle will own the
      hardware at the remaining sites. All sites will serve OpenAI’s
      workloads.The sitesAbilene, TexasSatellite image of the Abilene, Texas
      Stargate site. Image © Airbus DS 2026, captured 2026-03-24.Current
      capacity: 0.3 GW | 250,000 H100-equivalents5Projected capacity: 1.2 GW |
      1.0 million H100-equivalentsProjected completion: Q4 2026The Stargate
      project’s flagship location is in Abilene, Texas. Built by AI
      infrastructure company Crusoe, Abilene is the most complete Stargate site
      to date, with an estimated four of the eight buildings already
      operational. These buildings house state-of-the-art Nvidia Blackwell
      chips.Power is currently supplied by a mix of on-site natural gas and grid
      power, which includes local wind power.OpenAI had planned to expand this
      site to 2.1 GW, but recently reversed course, deciding to direct that
      capacity to other locations. Microsoft has since partnered with Crusoe for
      the adjacent 900 MW site.View with satellite explorerShackelford County,
      TexasSatellite image of the Shackelford County, Texas Stargate site. Image
      © 2026 Vantor, captured 2026-04-14.Current capacity: 0 GWProjected
      capacity: 2 GW | 4.2 million H100-equivalentsProjected completion: Q4
      2028Just across the county line from the Abilene site, data center
      developer Vantage is constructing a massive 1,200-acre (4.9-square-
      kilometer) campus with 10 buildings.The campus will be powered by an
      onsit... [TRUNCATED]

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

37. TITLE: Opus 4.7 scores near frontier on ECI
   SOURCE: Epoch_AI | DATE: Tue, 21 Apr 2026 17:30:18 GMT
   URL: https://epochai.substack.com/p/opus-47-scores-near-frontier-on-eci
   MATCHED PILLARS: [SILICON HARDWARE]
   EXTRACTED SNIPPET:
      CONTENT:
      Opus 4.7 scores 156 on ECI, our tool for combining multiple benchmarks
      onto a single scale. This puts it a bit ahead of Opus 4.6 and a bit behind
      only GPT-5.4, Gemini 3.1 Pro, and GPT-5.4 Pro. Thread with individual
      scores and commentary.On FrontierMath, Opus 4.7 scored 44% on Tiers 1-3
      and 23% on Tier 4, ahead of every model except GPT-5.4 and GPT-5.4 Pro.On
      SWE-bench Verified, Opus 4.7 scored 83%, a new record for our evaluations
      on this benchmark. SWE-bench Verified may be increasingly contaminated,
      and we hope to evaluate Opus 4.7 on other coding benchmarks soon.Opus 4.7
      scored 30% on our Chess Puzzles benchmark. This is a substantial jump over
      previous Anthropic models, though it remains far from the frontier. Opus
      4.7 hit its max output limit before answering for 31% of problems. We plan
      to improve elicitation here.Opus 4.7 also solved the last problem on our
      older math benchmark, Mock AIME, that had not been solved by any model
      before. This problem involves interpreting the diagram shown below when
      given as Asymptote vector graphics code.Opus 4.7 was a bit behind the top
      scores on GPQA Diamond (90% vs. 95%). Anecdotally, this may be due to
      refusing to answer some questions for safety reasons, even though GPQA
      isn’t meant to cover dangerous topics. See, for instance, the cut-off
      sample below.ECI also incorporates scores from third-party benchmarks. So
      far, for Opus 4.7, we have ARC-AGI-1, ARC-AGI-2, WeirdML v2, and
      SimpleBench. Its ECI score will evolve as we collect additional benchmark
      scores.For all these and more, check out our website!Subscribe now

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

38. TITLE: Another Conversation with Val Bercovici Memory Markets
   SOURCE: Fabricated_Knowledge | DATE: Mon, 16 Feb 2026 17:13:23 GMT
   URL: https://www.fabricatedknowledge.com/p/another-conversation-with-val-bercovici
   MATCHED PILLARS: [MACRO FINANCE, SILICON HARDWARE, PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE]
   EXTRACTED SNIPPET:
      CONTENT:
      Another conversation about KV Cache! Doug: Welcome back to the Fabricated
      Knowledge podcast. I have Val from WEKA once again, and we are here to
      talk about memory. I think from last time to now, it was actually a pretty
      complete podcast. We were rambling a little bit about KV cache, NAND
      offloading. And I think from then to now, we’ve really seen quite a
      different market. NAND prices have exploded. All memory prices have
      exploded. And I still think it’s the same story. I wanted to update
      everything, talk to Val, and get some more current thoughts on the whole
      market. Thanks for being here.Val: It’s a pleasure. Happy to be a repeat
      guest.Doug: Thanks for coming. I think we were talking about this a little
      bit before — let’s actually talk about the Jensen conversation, because at
      CES, the big news was — and people took this to the utmost extreme,
      everyone’s like, “everyone needs 16 terabytes per GPU.” Maybe that’s a
      little bit of a BlueField advertisement, but let’s just talk about the
      endorsement of the KV cache market overall.Val: Absolutely. Like we were
      saying earlier, it was kind of a confusing topic last summer. The
      ecosystem wasn’t really ready for KV offloading. Agentic demand hadn’t
      exploded yet, even though you and I probably anticipated it back then.
      We’re here now, right? Agents are exploding — even pre-Claude Code. We’re
      all Claude Code-pilled over the past holidays. We’re seeing trillion-token
      consumption by AI startups now as a routine thing, daily sometimes. So the
      demand is there, and it’s cool to see that different vendors had different
      names for it before Jensen just anointed it as the “context memory” market
      — and particularly “context memory storage” as we extend storage beyond
      HBM and DRAM onto NVMe.Doug: It’s kind of a big deal. I’m actually going
      to try to do this live and see what SemiAnalysis is paying in terms of
      OpenAI, because for a company that doesn’t have a massive engineering team
      — we have a few programmers for sure — but we are definitely adopting this
      on a pretty hardcore basis. We’re running at like half a billion tokens a
      day.Val: I see a lot of organizations around that billion tokens a day,
      and this number is climbing rapidly. It was funny because we were just
      chatting about the pricing yesterday. Opus 4.6 fast above 200,000-token
      context is $225 per million output tokens.Doug: Wow. I got it wrong.Val:
      No, no — there’s actually two tiers. If you’re below 200K tokens and above
      200K tokens. I was thinking of the above-200K tier.Doug: Yeah. Well, let’s
      be clear — I think everyone at our firm uses the 1-million-token context
      window. That’s it. It’s so much better. It really is. It’s crazy.And I
      feel like maybe that’s the logical segue — the last time we talked, we
      discussed essentially how you’d have an infinite context window. I think
      since then, the thing that’s changed is the context rot problem does seem
      to be real. But that doesn’t mean you don’t need more context. In fact,
      you need a ton of context... [TRUNCATED]

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

39. TITLE: Controlling the capital after AGI
   SOURCE: Epoch_AI | DATE: Wed, 10 Jun 2026 02:35:39 GMT
   URL: https://epochai.substack.com/p/controlling-the-capital-after-agi
   MATCHED PILLARS: [SILICON HARDWARE]
   EXTRACTED SNIPPET:
      CONTENT:
      Gradient Updates shares more opinionated or informal takes on big
      questions in AI progress. These posts solely represent the views of the
      authors, and do not necessarily reflect the views of Epoch AI as a
      whole.This piece does not advocate for any policy.IntroductionAGI1 might
      generate immense economic output, but it could take many people’s jobs in
      the process and leave them with no way to earn a decent living. Those with
      little savings during the “AGI transition” would then be unable to support
      themselves on the other side. Less drastically, even if many well-paying
      jobs remain after AGI, the capital share2 may greatly increase, which
      would tend to greatly increase inequality.If this happens, how might the
      gains be redistributed? More concretely, putting aside the question of how
      the state raises tax revenues after AGI, and what percentage of GDP is
      raised, how do existing proposals for redistributing this revenue
      differ?Proposals for universal benefits abound, including:Universal basic
      income (UBI): The government pays everyone cash. This is the best known,
      and has been endorsed by Elon Musk, Vinod Khosla, Geoffrey Hinton, and
      many others.3 As part of this, the government might impose restrictions on
      the extent to which people could borrow against their future payments,
      just as it is illegal today to borrow against your social security, to
      prevent people from impoverishing themselves in the future.Universal basic
      services (UBS): The government gives everyone access to free public
      services. Think welfare states like Norway or Sweden, except that the
      government covers all basic needs, including things like food and housing
      which the Nordics currently don’t provide.Universal basic capital (UBC):
      The government gives people their own capital assets (such as equity in an
      index fund, or in AI firms in particular), so that people can live off the
      dividends. It may impose restrictions on the extent to which people can
      sell their assets.Sovereign wealth funds (SWF): The government owns
      capital and distributes the dividends it generates.4And of course each
      proposal comes in many flavors.Comparing the long and growing list of
      proposals in every detail can be daunting. But there is a way in which
      they resemble more familiar debates over redistribution: they concern the
      extent to which the government should provide some good directly, or give
      people cash and let them buy what they like.The main axis: control of the
      capitalWe’re familiar with the question of whether to give the poor cash
      or food stamps — or, if food stamps, whether to make junk food ineligible.
      In debates over how to implement broad-based redistribution after AGI, we
      rarely hear the idea that the transfers should be restricted to a
      particular whitelist of necessities; the exception is the (uncommon)
      proposal for “universal basic services”. Instead, the debate is mainly
      over how fully our redistribution scheme should give citizens control not
      just of the capital income but of the ca... [TRUNCATED]

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

40. TITLE: AI is Creating Peak Software, Media is the Best Analogy
   SOURCE: Fabricated_Knowledge | DATE: Thu, 10 Jul 2025 12:03:08 GMT
   URL: https://www.fabricatedknowledge.com/p/ai-is-creating-peak-software-media
   MATCHED PILLARS: [SILICON HARDWARE]
   EXTRACTED SNIPPET:
      CONTENT:
      Let’s start with the basics. Software and the cost of creating software
      are dropping massively, as tools like Cursor and Claude Code proliferate.
      What used to cost thousands of dollars in tokens now costs mere cents, as
      generative AI is making coding much cheaper and faster. That is an obvious
      statement. But so what? I think today, I want to propose my theory on how
      I see the broader software ecosystem will be impacted by the influx of new
      supply from coding agents. Welcome to the Software disruption flood. We
      have a very recent case study at hand to consider how software will be
      impacted. Today, I want to compare the rise of coding agents to the rise
      of YouTube and the destruction of linear media. I think it is the single
      best frame to view how software will change from here. So let’s set the
      scene.The Internet, YouTube, and the BundleOnce upon a time, there was a
      paradigm of content in which for a single subscription, you could consume
      1000s of channels of content in a bundle via TV. The anchor of this bundle
      was Live Sports (still is), and this was the last meta of Media
      consumption. This lasted for decades as TV was the killer application
      (over radio!) from the 1980s to the mid-2010s. Now Media itself is just
      content, and it can be viewed on TV in the Bundle, over-the-top (like
      Netflix), or even now via short-form content on TikTok, Reels, and YouTube
      Shorts. The key inflection point that screwed the Bundle from it’s peak of
      ~87% penetration to ~40s penetration today. Source:
      https://nscreenmedia.com/traditional-pay-tv-us-home-penetration-2023/This
      is the ugly peak of TV, and compared to the very glorious rise in
      penetration, it’s a painful sight to watch in real time. Meanwhile,
      YouTube (my proxy of choice this time) blew up in conjunction. The timing
      is quite accurate, and you can see the beginning of the S-curve of YouTube
      almost perfectly align with the top of the cable bundle. In the 2010s, as
      YouTube experienced explosive growth, the cable bundle reached its peak
      and then began to decline. Source: https://prioridata.com/data/youtube-
      valuation/This is what happens when your platform peaks, and I think that
      the Web 2.0 SaaS era bears a striking resemblance to this analogy. But
      before we get there, let’s talk about what killed the bundle. In
      hindsight, it’s pretty straightforward to attribute the issue broadly to
      the internet. However, I think that it wasn’t just the distribution (via
      the Internet) but also the media itself that changed, shifting from being
      concentrated in relatively few media makers (thousands of channels) to
      millions of individual creators. There are ~113.9 million channels on
      YouTube, with 32,300 with over 1 million subscribers. For example, Mr
      Beast now has 400 million subscribers. That’s larger than the entire
      United States and much larger than Cable TV ever was. And it’s not like Mr
      Beast entered the ring with massive funding and a distribution channel. He
      raced to the top because the cost to enter the Media... [TRUNCATED]

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

41. TITLE: Meta Superintelligence – Leadership Compute, Talent, and Data
   SOURCE: SemiAnalysis | DATE: Fri, 11 Jul 2025 20:12:19 +0000
   URL: https://semianalysis.com/2025/07/11/meta-superintelligence-leadership-compute-talent-and-data/
   MATCHED PILLARS: [MACRO FINANCE, SILICON HARDWARE, PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE]
   EXTRACTED SNIPPET:
      CONTENT:
      Meta’s shocking purchase of 49% of Scale AI at a ~$30B valuation shows
      that money is of no concern for the $100B annual cashflow ad machine.
      Despite seemingly unlimited resources, Meta has been falling behind
      foundation labs in model performance.
      The real wake-up call came when Meta lost its lead in open-weight models
      to DeepSeek. That stirred the sleeping giant. Now in full Founder Mode,
      Mark Zuckerberg is personally leading Meta’s charge, identifying Meta’s
      two core shortcomings: Talent and Compute. As one of the last founders
      still running a tech behemoth, Mark doesn’t need SemiAnalysis to tell him
      to slow down stock buybacks to fund the future!
      Source: Meta financials and SemiAnalysis estimates
      In addition to throwing money at the problem, he’s fundamentally
      rethinking Meta’s approach to GenAI. He’s starting a new
      “Superintelligence” team from scratch and personally poaching top AI
      talent with pay that makes top athlete pay look like chump change. The
      typical offer for the folks being poached for this team is $200 million
      over 4 years. That is 100x that of their peers. Furthermore, there have
      been some billion dollar offers that were not accepted by
      researcher/engineering leadership at OpenAI. While these offers aren’t all
      successful, Zuck is crushing the competitors by drastically increasing
      their cost per employee.
      Perhaps even more iconic, Zuck threw his entire Datacenter playbook into
      the trash and is now building multi-billion-dollar GPU clusters in
      “Tents”!
      Source: SemiAnalysis Datacenter Model – as of 07/06/2025
      As this report details, nothing is off the table. We unpack Meta’s
      unprecedented reinvention from Compute to Talent in the pursuit of
      Superintelligence as well as the story of how we got here. From Llama 3.0
      open-sourced dominance to the epic fail of Llama 4 Behemoth, this Titan of
      AI is down but not out. In fact, we believe Meta’s ramp in training FLOPS
      will rival even that of OAI. The company is going from GPU-poor to GPU-
      filthy-rich on a per researcher basis.
      Meta GenAI 1.0: AI Incrementalism
      Compared to pure-play AI labs like OpenAI, companies like Meta and Google
      have followed an “AI Incrementalism” strategy by enhancing existing
      products with better recommendation systems and GenAI to improve ad
      targeting, content tagging, and internal tools. This has paid off
      handsomely in financial results, allowing Meta to shrug off Apple’s
      attempts at stopping them from tracking users with the release of their
      App Tracking Transparency (ATT) feature in iOS 14.5 (late 2021, early
      2022).
      Source: Company filings
      While Meta is arguably more insulated from GenAI disruption than Google,
      LLM efforts at both companies have been somewhat disappointing. One reason
      is the allocation of capital primarily for the core business rather than
      pursuing superintelligence.
      “Our CapEx growth this year is going toward both generative AI and core
      business needs with the majority of overall CapEx supporting the...
      [TRUNCATED]

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

42. TITLE: 2026 AI & Semiconductor Outlook
   SOURCE: Fabricated_Knowledge | DATE: Wed, 07 Jan 2026 21:37:33 GMT
   URL: https://www.fabricatedknowledge.com/p/2026-ai-and-semiconductor-outlook
   MATCHED PILLARS: [SILICON HARDWARE, SUPPLY CHAIN CHOKEPOINTS, PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE]
   EXTRACTED SNIPPET:
      CONTENT:
       Happy New Year! Last year was incredible for semiconductors — and AI
      stocks in particular — so as tradition demands, here’s the annual outlook.
      Fair warning: outlooks are hard. Things change constantly, and my views
      will change with them.But first, let’s see who actually won.2025 Year
      Performance ReviewLet’s ask ourselves who won this year, and the answers
      are a bit surprising. If I had to put the stories of 2025 in
      semiconductors into a single cohesive narrative, it would be:  AI spending
      stepped down the stack. Memory and optics were the beneficiaries. The
      bottlenecks moved from GPUs to the things that feed and connect
      them.Semicap finally participated. WFE was tepid, but the stocks ripped
      anyway. The market is pricing in what’s coming.Automotive remains in
      purgatory. I thought it would bottom last year. I was wrong. Will it
      bottom this year? I’m done guessing.This is the year the AI story got
      leverage. This remains my favorite topic, and I wrote about it in Capital
      Cycles and AI and referenced it in the railroads piece. The chart below
      tells the story. This year was clearly the year of memory and optics. I
      was pretty bullish on optics last year, and I think that definitely was
      the best prediction of them all so far. I also said that HBM would be
      really solid, and that definitely worked out. I did, however, get really
      negative on everything related to the trade war and flipped out a bit too
      late. But at the end of the year, I am back to a believer, as I believe
      the most logical path is probably a bubble in the semiconductor / AI
      world. 2025 Predictions Scorecard Before we continue into each big key
      theme, I did want to evaluate some of my “predictions”. What Worked:
      Optics “most bullish for 2025” — LITE +331%, FN +107%, TSEM +128%  HBM
      memory — MU +228%  AI returns moderate — NVDA +35% (vs +178% in 2024)
      Intel pivot (Aug) — +75% from $21 to $37  Rambus (MRDIMM) — +72%  SiTime —
      +58%  MPWR — +54%  Lattice — +31%What Didn’t: AMD bear — +78% (ouch)
      “Avoid NAND/HDD” — WDC +270% (missed a 3x) Automotive bottom-fish — ON
      -12%, MBLY -48% (year 3 of pain) Semicap “middle of road” — LRCX +139%,
      KLAC +93% (undercalled)I’d say it was okay, but I definitely think I could
      do better. Anyway, let’s move on to this year’s themes, because I think
      they are noteworthy. Memory and OpticsThe bottlenecks became the winners.
      I was bullish on HBM last year, but I underestimated the knock-on effect:
      when HBM sells out, DRAM tightens. When DRAM tightens, prices rip.Source:
      BloombergPeople are buying DRAM for the price of a new PC; the price
      changes are catastrophic. I have never seen a line increase so rapidly and
      so sharply in semiconductor history. After the worst memory cycle, we are
      now in the strongest memory cycle in history. No surprise that a historic
      AI cycle would cause this. In optics, we are seeing a similar situation,
      with a complete shortage of EMLs, CW lasers, VSCELs, etc. It’s all
      backordered, and that’s for the massive 800g cycle. We are no...
      [TRUNCATED]

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

43. TITLE: Five hyperscalers now own over two-thirds of global AI compute
   SOURCE: Epoch_AI | DATE: Tue, 14 Apr 2026 20:43:57 GMT
   URL: https://epochai.substack.com/p/five-hyperscalers-now-own-over-two
   MATCHED PILLARS: [MACRO FINANCE]
   EXTRACTED SNIPPET:
      CONTENT:
      Five companies — Google, Microsoft, Meta, Amazon, and Oracle — now control
      about two-thirds of the world’s compute, up slightly from ~60% at the
      start of 2024.Many AI labs (including OpenAI and Anthropic) depend almost
      entirely on these hyperscalers for access to their compute.This data comes
      from our new AI Chip Owners datahub. For more details, see our full data
      insight.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

44. TITLE: The Epoch Brief - June 1, 2026
   SOURCE: Epoch_AI | DATE: Mon, 01 Jun 2026 15:50:56 GMT
   URL: https://epochai.substack.com/p/the-epoch-brief-june-1-2026
   MATCHED PILLARS: [MACRO FINANCE, SILICON HARDWARE, PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE]
   EXTRACTED SNIPPET:
      CONTENT:
      In this week’s Epoch Brief:Since January 2026, open-weight models have
      lagged the closed frontier by four months, with the gap widening slightly
      since we last measured it in October 2025.Hyperscaler capital expenditures
      have quadrupled since GPT-4’s release, on track with our previous
      projection.In the latest Gradient Update, Luke Emberson and Jaime Sevilla
      estimate trends in global inference capacity and find that token demand
      appears to be growing much faster than supply.Subscribe nowResearchOpen
      models now trail closed models by four monthsIn our latest Data Insight,
      researchers Luke Emberson and Jack Edwards find that the most capable
      open-weight models have lagged frontier closed models by approximately
      four months in the Epoch Capabilities Index since January 2026. The
      average 8-point gap is comparable to the performance difference between
      GPT-5 and GPT-5.5.Hyperscaler capital expenditures have quadrupled since
      GPT-4’s releaseHyperscaler capital expenditures came in on trend in Q1
      2026, continuing the trajectory that projects spending of $770 billion
      this year and over $1 trillion in 2027. In February, we projected $155.1
      billion in aggregate for Q1, and actual spending by our measure was $156.1
      billion. This is up from $140.6 billion of spending in Q4.Commentary: Is a
      compute crunch coming?In the latest Gradient Update, Luke Emberson and
      Jaime Sevilla model how many tokens the world could serve today. They
      estimate supply is growing 3-4× per year. While direct comparisons are
      difficult, it appears demand for tokens is growing much faster, at ~10×
      per year. This suggests a compute crunch is nearing, if not already here.
      Gradient Updates are informal, opinionated analyses that represent the
      views of individual authors, not Epoch AI as a whole.Other UpdatesSurveyWe
      want to produce the most useful work on AI’s trajectory. To ensure we’re
      meeting your needs, we’d love your feedback.→ Take our 5-minute survey.
      You can opt in at the end to join our user panel for future compensated
      studies.NarrationsYou can now listen to long-form content on the Epoch AI
      website, including reports, Gradient Updates, and topic overviews. Look
      for the play button.CareersWe’re hiring across several roles. All
      positions are fully remote.Designer to translate complex research into
      intuitive, engaging, and high-impact designs — primarily UI/UX and data
      visualization work.Researchers and Senior Researchers to lead new projects
      across our expanding teams.Data Scientist (Contract) to assist with our AI
      research efforts, including reviewing technical literature, tracking
      benchmark data, and analyzing AI models, data centers, and
      companies.Applications are rolling, so apply soon!Subscribe nowIn case you
      missed it…ResearchMemory has grown to nearly two-thirds of AI chip
      component costs (May 21)CommentaryFrontier labs don’t use most AI compute
      (yet) (May 21)

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

